cat : Politics and Laws
sub_cat : Law

This page intentionally left blank

International Law and International Relations

This volume is intended to help readers understand the relationship
between international law and international relations (IL/IR). As a testament to this dynamic area of inquiry, new research on IL/IR is now being
published in a growing list of traditional law reviews and disciplinary
journals. The excerpted articles in this volume, all of which were first
published in International Organization, represent some of the most
important research since serious social science scholarship began in
this area more than twenty years ago. They are important milestones
toward making IL/IR a central concern of scholarly research in
international affairs. The contributions have been selected to cover
some of the main topics of international affairs and to provide readers
with a range of theoretical perspectives, concepts, and heuristics that
can be used to analyze the relationship between international law and
international relations.
Beth A. Simmons is Professor of Government and Director of the
Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Richard H. Steinberg is Professor of Law at the University of California,
Los Angeles, and Senior Scholar in the Division of International,
Comparative and Area Studies at Stanford University, Stanford,
California.

International Organization Books

Issues and Agents in International Political Economy, edited by
Benjamin J. Cohen and Charles Lipson
Theory and Structure in International Political Economy, edited by
Charles Lipson and Benjamin J. Cohen
International Institutions, edited by Lisa L. Martin and Beth A. Simmons
International Institutions and Socialization in Europe, edited by Jeffrey
T. Checkel
International Law and International Relations, edited by Beth A. Simmons
and Richard H. Steinberg

International Law and International
Relations

Edited by
BETH A. SIMMONS and RICHARD H. STEINBERG

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521861861
© 2006 IO Foundation
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published in print format 2007
eBook (NetLibrary)
ISBN-13 978-0-511-29648-2
ISBN-10 0-511-29648-7
eBook (NetLibrary)
hardback
ISBN-13 978-0-521-86186-1
hardback
ISBN-10 0-521-86186-1
paperback
ISBN-13 978-0-521-67991-6
paperback
ISBN-10 0-521-67991-5
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents

Contributors

page ix

Abstracts

xiii

Preface
Beth A. Simmons and Richard H. Steinberg
Editors’ Note

xxix
xxxvii

part i. international regimes theory:
does law matter?
1 Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes
as Intervening Variables (1982)
Stephen D. Krasner
2 The Demand for International Regimes (1982)
Robert O. Keohane

3
18

part ii. commitment and compliance
3 Democratic States and Commitment in International
Relations (1996)
Kurt Taylor Gaubatz
4 On Compliance (1993)
Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes
5 Is the Good News About Compliance Good News About
Cooperation? (1996)
George W. Downs, David M. Rocke, and Peter N. Barsoom
v

43
65

92

vi

Contents
part iii. legalization and its limits

6 The Concept of Legalization (2000)
115
Kenneth W. Abbot, Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik,
Anne-Marie Slaughter, and Duncan Snidal
7 Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational
(2000)
131
Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, and Anne-Marie Slaughter
8 Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics:
A Cautionary Note (2000)
157
Judith Goldstein and Lisa L. Martin
9 Alternatives to ‘‘Legalization’’: Richer Views of Law
and Politics (2001)
188
Martha Finnemore and Stephen J. Toope

part iv. international law and international norms
10 Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory:
International Jurisprudence and the Third World
(1987)
Robert H. Jackson

205

11 Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘‘Failure’’ of
Internationalism (1997)
Jeffrey W. Legro

233

12 The Territorial Integrity Norm: International Boundaries
and the Use of Force (2001)
Mark W. Zacher

259

part v. treaty design and dynamics
13 Why Are Some International Agreements Informal? (1991)
Charles Lipson
14 The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design: Explaining
Legalism in Regional Trade Pacts (2000)
James McCall Smith
15 Loosening the Ties that Bind: A Learning Model
of Agreement Flexibility (2001)
Barbara Koremenos
16 Driving with the Rearview Mirror: On the Rational Science
of Institutional Design (2001)
Alexander Wendt

293

331

375

403

Contents
17 The Dynamics of International Law: The Interaction
of Normative and Operating Systems (2003)
Paul F. Diehl, Charlotte Ku, and Daniel Zamora

vii

426

part vi. law and legal institutions
18 Europe Before the Court: A Political Theory of Legal
Integration (1993)
Anne-Marie Slaughter [Burley] and Walter Mattli

457

19 The European Court of Justice, National Governments,
and Legal Integration in the European Union (1998)
Geoffrey Garrett, R. Daniel Kelemen, and Heiner Schulz

486

part vii. other substantive areas of international law
Security
20 Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability
of Peace (2003)
Virginia Page Fortna

515

Trade
21 In the Shadow of Law or Power? Consensus-Based
Bargaining and Outcomes in the GATT/WTO (2002)
Richard H. Steinberg

543

Money
22 The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs (2000)
Beth A. Simmons

568

War Crimes
23 Constructing an Atrocities Regime: The Politics of War
Crimes Tribunals (2001)
Christopher Rudolph
Human Rights
24 The Origins of Human Rights Regimes: Democratic
Delegation in Postwar Europe (2000)
Andrew Moravcsik
Environment
25 Regime Design Matters: Intentional Oil Pollution
and Treaty Compliance (1994)
Ronald B. Mitchell

594

622

653

viii

Contents

Intellectual Property
26 The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources (2004)
Kal Raustiala and David G. Victor

684

References

711

Index

713

Contributors

Volume Editors
Beth A. Simmons is Professor of Government and Director of the
Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Richard H. Steinberg is Professor of Law at the University of California,
Los Angeles, and Senior Scholar in the Division of International,
Comparative and Area Studies at Stanford University, Stanford,
California.

Contributors
Kenneth W. Abbot is Professor of Law at Arizona State University,
Tempe, Arizona.
Peter N. Barsoom is Director of Credit Card Services at Merrill Lynch,
New York, New York.
Abram Chayes (1922–2000) was Professor of Law at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Antonia Handler Chayes is Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy at the John
F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Paul F. Diehl is Professor of Political Science at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign.
ix

x

Contributors

George W. Downs is Professor of Politics at New York University,
New York, New York.
Martha Finnemore is Professor of Political Science and International
Affairs at George Washington University, Washington, D.C.
Virginia Page Fortna is Assistant Professor of Political Science at
Columbia University, New York, New York.
Geoffrey Garrett is Professor of International Relations at University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, and President of the Pacific Council
on International Policy, Los Angeles, California.
Kurt Taylor Gaubatz is Associate Professor of International Studies at
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia.
Judith Goldstein is Professor of Political Science, Sakurako and William
Fisher Family Director of International, Comparative and Area Studies,
and The Kaye University Fellow in Undergraduate Education at Stanford
University, Stanford, California.
Robert H. Jackson is Professor of International Relations and Political
Science at Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
R. Daniel Kelemen is University Lecturer and Tutorial Fellow at Lincoln
College, University of Oxford.
Robert O. Keohane is Professor of International Affairs at Princeton
University, Princeton, New Jersey.
Barbara Koremenos is Assistant Professor of Political Science at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Stephen D. Krasner is Director of Policy Planning at the United States Department of State, Washington, D.C., and Professor of Political Science
at Stanford University, Stanford, California.
Charlotte Ku is Executive Vice President and Executive Director of the
American Society of International Law, Washington, D.C.
Jeffrey W. Legro is Associate Professor of International Relations at the
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
Charles Lipson is Professor of Political Science at the University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Contributors

xi

Lisa L. Martin is Professor of Government and a member of the Executive Committee of The Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Walter Mattli is the Fellow in Politics at St. John’s College and Professor of International Political Economy, Oxford University, Oxford,
England.
Ronald B. Mitchell is Professor of Political Science at the University of
Oregon, Eugene, Oregon.
Andrew Moravcsik is Professor of Politics at Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey.
Kal Raustiala is Professor of Law and Global Studies at the University of
California, Los Angeles.
David M. Rocke is Professor of Biostatistics, Professor of Applied
Science, and Co-Director of the Institute for Data Analysis and Visualization at the University of California, Davis.
Christopher Rudolph is Professor of International Politics at American
University, Washington, D.C.
Heiner Schulz is Assistant Professor of Political Science at University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Anne-Marie Slaughter [Burley] is Dean of the Woodrow Wilson School
of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, Princeton,
New Jersey.
James McCall Smith is Assistant Professor of Political Science and
International Affairs at George Washington University, Washington, D.C.
Duncan Snidal is Associate Professor of Political Science and a member of the Committee on International Relations at the University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
Stephen J. Toope is Professor of Law at McGill University, Quebec,
Canada.
David G. Victor is Associate Professor of Political Science at Stanford
University and director of the Program on Energy and Sustainable Development at the Center for Environmental Science and Policy, Stanford,
California.

xii

Contributors

Alexander Wendt is the Ralph D. Mershon Professor of International
Security and the Mershon Center Professor of Political Science at Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio.
Mark W. Zacher is Professor Emeritus of Political Science, Senior
Research Fellow at the Centre of International Relations, and Faculty
Fellow, St. John’s College, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.
Daniel Zamora is an associate at the law firm of Tobin & Tobin, San
Francisco, California.

Abstracts

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes as Intervening
Variables (1982)
by Stephen D. Krasner
International regimes are defined as principles, norms, rules, and decisionmaking procedures around which actor expectations converge in a given
issue-area. As a starting point, regimes have been conceptualized as
intervening variables, standing between basic causal factors and related
outcomes and behavior. There are three views about the importance of
regimes: conventional structural orientations dismiss regimes as being at
best ineffectual; Grotian orientations view regimes as an intimate component of the international system; and modified structural perspectives
see regimes as significant only under certain constrained conditions. For
Grotian and modified structuralist arguments, which endorse the view
that regimes can influence outcomes and behavior, regime development is
seen as a function of five basic causal variables: egoistic self-interest,
political power, diffuse norms and principles, custom and usage, and
knowledge.

The Demand for International Regimes (1982)
by Robert O. Keohane
International regimes can be understood as results of rational behavior by
the actors – principally states – that create them. Regimes are demanded
in part because they facilitate the making of agreements, by providing
information and reducing transaction costs in world politics. Increased
xiii

xiv

Abstracts

interdependence among issues – greater ‘‘issue density’’ – will lead to
increased demand for regimes. Insofar as regimes succeed in providing
high-quality information, through such processes as the construction of
generally accepted norms or the development of transgovernmental relations, they create demand for their own continuance, even if the structural
conditions (such as hegemony) under which they were first supplied
change. Analysis of the demand for international regimes thus helps
us to understand lags between structural change and regime change, as
well as to assess the significance of transgovernmental policy networks.
Several assertions of structural theory seem problematic in light of this
analysis. Hegemony may not be a necessary condition for stable international regimes; past patterns of institutionalized cooperation may
be able to compensate, to some extent, for increasing fragmentation of
power.
Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations
(1996)
by Kurt Taylor Gaubatz
Making credible commitments is a formidable problem for states in
the anarchic international system. A long-standing view holds that this
is particularly true for democratic states in which changeable public preferences make it difficult for leaders to sustain commitments over
time. However, a number of important elements in the values and institutions that have characterized the liberal democratic states should enhance their ability to sustain international commitments. Indeed, an
examination of the durability of international military alliances confirms
that those between democratic states have endured longer than either
alliances between nondemocracies or alliances between democracies and
nondemocracies.
On Compliance (1993)
by Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes
A new dialogue is beginning between students of international law and
international relations scholars concerning compliance with international agreements. This article advances some basic propositions to frame
that dialogue. First, it proposes that the level of compliance with international agreements in general is inherently unverifiable by empirical
procedures. That nations generally comply with their international

Abstracts

xv

agreements, on the one hand, or that they violate them whenever it is in
their interest to do so, on the other, are not statements of fact or even hypotheses to be tested. Instead, they are competing heuristic assumptions.
Some reasons why the background assumption of a propensity to comply
is plausible and useful are given. Second, compliance problems very often
do not reflect a deliberate decision to violate an international undertaking
on the basis of a calculation of advantage. The article proposes a variety of
other reasons why states may deviate from treaty obligations and why in
many circumstances those reasons are properly accepted by others as
justifying apparent departures from treaty norms. Third, the treaty regime
as a whole need not and should not be held to a standard of strict compliance but to a level of overall compliance that is ‘‘acceptable’’ in the
light of the interests and concerns the treaty is designed to safeguard.
How the acceptable level is determined and adjusted is considered.
Is the Good News About Compliance Good News About
Cooperation? (1996)
by George W. Downs, David M. Rocke, and Peter N. Barsoom
Recent research on compliance in international regulatory regimes has
argued (1) that compliance is generally quite good; (2) that this high level
of compliance has been achieved with little attention to enforcement;
(3) that those compliance problems that do exist are best addressed as
management rather than enforcement problems; and (4) that the management rather than the enforcement approach holds the key to the evolution
of future regulatory cooperation in the international system. While the
descriptive findings are largely correct, the policy inferences are dangerously contaminated by endogeneity and selection problems. A high
rate of compliance is often the result of states formulating treaties that
require them to do little more than they would do in the absence of a
treaty. In those cases where noncompliance does occur and where the
effects of selection are attenuated, both self-interest and enforcement play
significant roles.
The Concept of Legalization (2000)
by Kenneth W. Abbot, Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik,
Anne-Marie Slaughter, and Duncan Snidal
We develop an empirically based conception of international legalization
to show how law and politics are intertwined across a wide range of

xvi

Abstracts

institutional forms and to frame the analytic and empirical articles that
follow in this volume. International legalization is a form of institutionalization characterized by three dimensions: obligation, precision, and
delegation. Obligation means that states are legally bound by rules or commitments and are therefore subject to the general rules and procedures of
international law. Precision means that the rules are definite, unambiguously defining the conduct they require, authorize, or proscribe. Delegation grants authority to third parties for the implementation of rules,
including their interpretation and application, dispute settlement, and
(possibly) further rule making. These dimensions are conceptually independent, and each is a matter of degree and gradation. Their various
combinations produce a remarkable variety of international legalization.
We illustrate a continuum ranging from ‘‘hard’’ legalization (characteristically associated with domestic legal systems) through various forms of
‘‘soft’’ legalization to situations where law is largely absent. Most international legalization lies between the extremes, where actors combine
and invoke varying degrees of obligation, precision, and delegation to
create subtle blends of politics and law.
Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational
(2000)
by Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, and
Anne-Marie Slaughter
We identify two ideal types of international third-party dispute resolution: interstate and transnational. Under interstate dispute resolution,
states closely control selection of, access to, and compliance with international courts and tribunals. Under transnational dispute resolution,
by contrast, individuals and nongovernmental entities have significant
influence over selection, access, and implementation. This distinction
helps to explain the politics of international legalization – in particular,
the initiation of cases, the tendency of courts to challenge national governments, the extent of compliance with judgments, and the long-term
evolution of norms within legalized international regimes. By reducing the
transaction costs of setting the process in motion and establishing new
constituencies, transnational dispute resolution is more likely than interstate dispute resolution to generate a large number of cases. The types of
cases brought under transnational dispute resolution lead more readily
to challenges of state actions by international courts. Transnational dispute resolution tends to be associated with greater compliance with

Abstracts

xvii

international legal judgments, particularly when autonomous domestic
institutions such as the judiciary mediate between individuals and the
international institutions. Overall, transnational dispute resolution enhances the prospects for long-term deepening and widening of international legalization.
Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics:
A Cautionary Note (2000)
by Judith Goldstein and Lisa L. Martin
If the purpose of legalization is to enhance international cooperation,
more may not always be better. Achieving the optimal level of legalization requires finding a balance between reducing the risks of opportunism
and reducing the potential negative effects of legalization on domestic
political processes. The global trade regime, which aims to liberalize
trade, has become increasingly legalized over time. Increased legalization has changed the information environment and the nature of government obligations, which in turn have affected the pattern of mobilization
of domestic interest groups on trade. From the perspective of encouraging the future expansion of liberal trade, we suggest some possible negative consequences of legalization, arguing that these consequences must
be weighed against the positive effects of legalization on increasing
national compliance. Since the weakly legalized GATT institution proved
sufficient to sustain widespread liberalization, the case for further legalization must be strong to justify far-reaching change in the global trade
regime.
Alternatives to ‘‘Legalization’’: Richer Views of Law and Politics (2001)
by Martha Finnemore and Stephen J. Toope
The authors of ‘‘Legalization and World Politics’’ (International Organization, 54, 3, summer 2000) define ‘‘legalization’’ as the degree of obligation, precision, and delegation that international institutions possess.
We argue that this definition is unnecessarily narrow. Law is a broad
social phenomenon that is deeply embedded in the practices, beliefs, and
traditions of societies. Understanding its role in politics requires attention
to the legitimacy of law, to custom and law’s congruence with social
practice, to the role of legal rationality, and to adherence to legal processes, including participation in law’s construction. We examine three
applications of ‘‘legalization’’ offered in the volume and show how a fuller

xviii

Abstracts

consideration of law’s role in politics can produce concepts that are more
robust intellectually and more helpful to empirical research.
Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory: International
Jurisprudence and the Third World (1987)
by Robert H. Jackson
Decolonization in parts of the Third World and particularly Africa has
resulted in the emergence of numerous ‘‘quasi-states,’’ which are independent largely by international courtesy. They exist by virtue of an
external right of self-determination – negative sovereignty – without yet
demonstrating much internal capacity for effective and civil government –
positive sovereignty. They therefore disclose a new dual international
civil regime in which two standards of statehood now coexist: the traditional empirical standard of the North and a new juridical standard of the
South. The biases in the constitutive rules of the sovereignty game today
and for the first time in modern international history arguably favor the
weak. If international theory is to account for this novel situation, it must
acknowledge the possibility that morality and legality can, in certain
circumstances, be independent of power in international relations. This
suggests that contemporary international theory must accommodate not
only Machiavellian realism and the sociological discourse of power but
also Grotian rationalism and the jurisprudential idiom of law.
Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘‘Failure’’ of
Internationalism (1997)
by Jeffrey W. Legro
Scholars tend to believe either that norms are relatively inconsequential or
that they are powerful determinants of international politics. Yet the
former view overlooks important effects that norms can have, while the
latter inadequately specifies which norms matter, the ways in which
the norms have an impact, and the magnitude of norm influence relative
to other factors. Three different norms on the use of force from the
interwar period varied in their influence during World War II. The variation in state adherence to these norms is best explained by the cultures
of national military organizations that mediated the influence of the
international rules. This analysis highlights the challenge and importance
of examining the relative effects of the often cross-cutting prescriptions
imbedded in different types of social collectivities.

Abstracts

xix

The Territorial Integrity Norm: International Boundaries and the Use
of Force (2001)
by Mark W. Zacher
Scholars and observers of the international system often comment on the
decreasing importance of international boundaries as a result of the
growth of international economic and social exchanges, economic liberalization, and international regimes. They generally fail to note, however,
that coercive territorial revisionism has markedly declined over the past
half century – a phenomenon that indicates that in certain ways states attach greater importance to boundaries in our present era. In this article
I first trace states’ beliefs and practices concerning the use of force to alter
boundaries from the birth of the Westphalian order in the seventeenth
century through the end of World War II. I then focus on the increasing
acceptance of the norm against coercive territorial revisionism since 1945.
Finally, I analyze those instrumental and ideational factors that have influenced the strengthening of the norm among both Western and developing countries.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal? (1991)
by Charles Lipson
Informal agreements are the most common form of international cooperation and the least studied. Ranging from simple oral deals to detailed executive agreements, they permit states to conclude profitable
bargains without the formality of treaties. They differ from treaties in more
than just a procedural sense. Treaties are designed, by long-standing
convention, to raise the credibility of promises by staking national
reputation on their adherence. Informal agreements have a more ambiguous status and are useful for precisely that reason. They are chosen to
avoid formal and visible national pledges, to avoid the political obstacles
of ratification, to reach agreements quickly and quietly, and to provide
flexibility for subsequent modification or even renunciation. They differ
from formal agreements not because their substance is less important (the
Cuban missile crisis was solved by informal agreement) but because the
underlying promises are less visible and more equivocal. The prevalence of
such informal devices thus reveals not only the possibilities of international
cooperation but also the practical obstacles and the institutional limits to
endogenous enforcement.

xx

Abstracts

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design: Explaining Legalism
in Regional Trade Pacts (2000)
by James McCall Smith
Dispute settlement mechanisms in international trade vary dramatically from one agreement to another. Some mechanisms are highly legalistic, with standing tribunals that resemble national courts in their
powers and procedures. Others are diplomatic, requiring only that the
disputing countries make a good-faith effort to resolve their differences through consultations. In this article I seek to account for the
tremendous variation in institutional design across a set of more than
sixty post-1957 regional trade pacts. In contrast to accounts that emphasize the transaction costs of collective action or the functional requirements of deep integration, I find that the level of legalism in each
agreement is strongly related to the level of economic asymmetry, in
interaction with the proposed depth of liberalization, among member
countries.

Loosening the Ties that Bind: A Learning Model of Agreement
Flexibility (2001)
by Barbara Koremenos
How can states credibly make and keep agreements when they are
uncertain about the distributional implications of their cooperation? They
can do so by incorporating the proper degree of flexibility into their agreements. I develop a formal model in which an agreement characterized
by uncertainty may be renegotiated to incorporate new information. The
uncertainty is related to the division of gains under the agreement, with
the parties resolving this uncertainty over time as they gain experience with
the agreement. The greater the agreement uncertainty, the more likely
states will want to limit the duration of the agreement and incorporate
renegotiation. Working against renegotiation is noise – that is, variation in
outcomes not resulting from the agreement. The greater the noise, the more
difficult it is to learn how an agreement is actually working; hence,
incorporating limited duration and renegotiation provisions becomes less
valuable. In a detailed case study, I demonstrate that the form of uncertainty in my model corresponds to that experienced by the parties to
the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, who adopted the solution my
model predicts.

Abstracts

xxi

Driving with the Rearview Mirror: On the Rational Science
of Institutional Design (2001)
by Alexander Wendt
The Rational Design project is impressive on its own terms. However, it
does not address other approaches relevant to the design of international institutions. To facilitate comparison I survey two ‘‘contrast spaces’’
around it. The first shares the project’s central question – What explains
institutional design? – but addresses alternative explanations of two types:
rival explanations and explanations complementary but deeper in the
causal chain. The second contrast begins with a different question: What
kind of knowledge is needed to design institutions in the real world?
Asking this question reveals epistemological differences between positive
social science and institutional design that can be traced to different
orientations toward time. Making institutions is about the future and has
an intrinsic normative element. Explaining institutions is about the past
and does not necessarily have this normative dimension. To avoid ‘‘driving
with the rearview mirror’’ we need two additional kinds of knowledge
beyond that developed in this volume: knowledge about institutional
effectiveness and knowledge about what values to pursue. As such, the
problem of institutional design is a fruitful site for developing a broader
and more practical conception of social science that integrates normative
and positive concerns.

The Dynamics of International Law: The Interaction of Normative
and Operating Systems (2003)
by Paul F. Diehl, Charlotte Ku, and Daniel Zamora
This article describes the basic components of the operating and normative
systems as a conceptual framework for analyzing and understanding
international law. There are many theoretical questions that follow from
the framework that embodies a normative and operating system. We
briefly outline one of those in this article, namely how the operating system changes. In doing so, we seek to address the puzzle of why operating
system changes do not always respond to alterations in the normative
sphere. A general theoretical argument focuses on four conditions. We
argue that the operating system only responds to normative changes when
response is ‘‘necessary’’ (stemming from incompatibility, ineffectiveness,
or insufficiency) for giving the norm effect and when the change is roughly
coterminous with a dramatic change in the political environment (that is,

xxii

Abstracts

‘‘political shock’’). We also argue, however, that opposition from leading
states and domestic political factors might serve to block or limit such
operating system change. These arguments are illustrated by reference to
three areas of the operating system as they concern the norm against
genocide.

Europe Before the Court: A Political Theory of Legal
Integration (1993)
by Anne-Marie Slaughter [Burley] and Walter Mattli
The European Court of Justice has been the dark horse of European
integration, quietly transforming the Treaty of Rome into a European
Community (EC) constitution and steadily increasing the impact and
scope of EC law. While legal scholars have tended to take the Court’s
power for granted, political scientists have overlooked it entirely. This
article develops a first-stage theory of community law and politics that
marries the insights of legal scholars with a theoretical framework
developed by political scientists. Neofunctionalism, the theory that
dominated regional integration studies in the 1960s, offers a set of
independent variables that convincingly and parsimoniously explain the
process of legal integration in the EC. Just as neofunctionalism predicts,
the principal forces behind that process are supranational and subnational
actors pursuing their own self-interests within a politically insulated
sphere. Its distinctive features include a widening of the ambit of successive
legal decisions according to a functional logic, a gradual shift in the
expectations of both government institutions and private actors participating in the legal system, and the strategic subordination of immediate
individual interests of member states to postulated collective interests over
the long term. Law functions as a mask for politics, precisely the role
neofunctionalists originally forecast for economics. Paradoxically, however, the success of legal institutions in performing that function rests on
their self-conscious preservation of the autonomy of law.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments, and Legal
Integration in the European Union (1998)
by Geoffrey Garrett, R. Daniel Kelemen, and Heiner Schulz
We develop a game theoretic model of the conditions under which the
European Court of Justice can be expected to take ‘‘adverse judgments’’

Abstracts

xxiii

against European Union member governments and when the governments are likely to abide by these decisions. The model generates three hypotheses. First, the greater the clarity of EU case law precedent, the lesser
the likelihood that the Court will tailor its decisions to the anticipated
reactions of member governments. Second, the greater the domestic costs
of an ECJ ruling to a litigant government, the lesser the likelihood that
the litigant government will abide by it (and hence the lesser the likelihood
that the Court will make such a ruling). Third, the greater the activism
of the ECJ and the larger the number of member governments adversely
affected by it, the greater the likelihood that responses by litigant governments will move from individual noncompliance to coordinated retaliation through new legislation or treaty revisions. These hypotheses are
tested against three broad lines of case law central to ECJ jurisprudence:
bans on agricultural imports, application of principles of equal treatment
of the sexes to occupational pensions, and state liability for violation of
EU law. The empirical analysis supports our view that though influenced
by legal precedent, the ECJ also takes into account the anticipated reactions of member governments.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability
of Peace (2003)
by Virginia Page Fortna
In the aftermath of war, what determines whether peace lasts or fighting resumes, and what can be done to foster durable peace? Drawing on
theories of cooperation, I argue that belligerents can overcome the
obstacles to peace by implementing measures that alter incentives,
reduce uncertainty about intentions, and manage accidents. A counterargument suggests that agreements are epiphenomenal, merely reflecting
the underlying probability of war resumption. I test hypotheses about
the durability of peace using hazard analysis. Controlling for factors
(including the decisiveness of victory, the cost of war, relative capabilities, and others) that affect the baseline prospects for peace, I find that
stronger agreements enhance the durability of peace. In particular,
measures such as the creation of demilitarized zones, explicit third-party
guarantees, peacekeeping, and joint commissions for dispute resolution affect the duration of peace. Agreements are not merely scraps
of paper; rather, their content matters in the construction of peace that
lasts.

xxiv

Abstracts

In the Shadow of Law or Power? Consensus-Based Bargaining
and Outcomes in the GATT/WTO (2002)
by Richard H. Steinberg
This article explains how consensus decision making has operated in
practice in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade/World Trade
Organization (GATT/WTO). When GATT/WTO bargaining is law-based,
consensus outcomes are Pareto-improving and roughly symmetrical.
When bargaining is power-based, states bring to bear instruments of
power that are extrinsic to rules, invisibly weighting the process and
generating consensus outcomes that are asymmetrical and may not be
Pareto-improving. Empirical analysis shows that although trade rounds
have been launched through law-based bargaining, hard law is generated
when a round is closed, and rounds have been closed through power-based
bargaining. Agenda setting has taken place in the shadow of that power
and has been dominated by the European Community and the United
States. The decision-making rules have been maintained because they help
generate information used by powerful states in the agenda-setting
process. Consensus decision making at the GATT/WTO is organized
hypocrisy, allowing adherence to the instrumental reality of asymmetrical
power and the sovereign equality principle upon which consensus decision
making is purportedly based.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs (2000)
by Beth A. Simmons
For the first time in history, international monetary relations were institutionalized after World War II as a set of legal obligations. The Articles
of Agreement that formed the International Monetary Fund contain
international legal obligations of the rules of good conduct for IMF
members. Members were required to maintain a par value for their
currency (until 1977), to use a single unified exchange-rate system, and to
keep their current account free from restrictions. In this article I explore
why governments committed themselves to these rules and the conditions under which they complied with their commitments. The evidence
suggests that governments tended to make and keep commitments if
other countries in their region did so as well. Governments also complied
with their international legal commitments if the regime placed a high
value on the rule of law domestically. One inference is that reputational
concerns have a lot to do with international legal commitments and

Abstracts

xxv

compliance. Countries that have invested in a strong reputation for protecting property rights are more reluctant to see it jeopardized by international law violations. Violation is more likely, however, in the face of
widespread noncompliance, suggesting that compliance behavior should
be understood in its regional context.
Constructing an Atrocities Regime: The Politics of War Crimes
Tribunals (2001)
by Christopher Rudolph
From the notorious ‘‘killing fields’’ of Cambodia to programs of ‘‘ethnic
cleansing’’ in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the grizzly nature of
ethnic and identity-centered conflict incites horror, outrage, and a human
desire for justice. While the drive to humanize warfare can be traced to the
writing of Hugo Grotius, current efforts to establish an atrocities regime
are unparalleled in modern history. Combining approaches in international relations theory and international law, I examine the role political
factors (norms, power and interests, institutions) and legal factors (precedent and procedure) play in the development of an atrocities regime.
International tribunals have convicted generally low-level war criminals
in both Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, but they have had much more
limited success in achieving their more expansive goals – deterring atrocities and fostering national reconciliation in regions fraught with ethnic
violence. This analysis reveals additional institutional modifications
needed to construct a more effective regime and highlights the importance of placing this new regime within a comprehensive international
strategy of conflict management.
The Origins of Human Rights Regimes: Democratic Delegation
in Postwar Europe (2000)
by Andrew Moravcsik
Most formal international human rights regimes establish international
committees and courts that hold governments accountable to their own
citizens for purely internal activities. Why would governments establish
arrangements so invasive of domestic sovereignty? Two views dominate
the literature. ‘‘Realist’’ theories assert that the most powerful democracies
coerce or entice weaker countries to accept norms; ‘‘ideational’’ theories
maintain that transnational processes of diffusion and persuasion socialize less-democratic governments to accept norms. Drawing on theories of

xxvi

Abstracts

rational delegation, I propose and test a third ‘‘republican liberal’’ view:
Governments delegate self-interestedly to combat future threats to domestic democratic governance. Thus it is not mature and powerful democracies, but new and less-established democracies that will most strongly
favor mandatory and enforceable human rights obligations. I test this proposition in the case of the European Convention on Human Rights – the
most successful system of formal international human rights guarantees in
the world today. The historical record of its founding – national positions,
negotiating tactics, and confidential deliberations – confirms the republican
liberal explanation. My claim that governments will sacrifice sovereignty
to international regimes in order to dampen domestic political uncertainty
and ‘‘lock in’’ more credible policies is then generalized theoretically and
applied to other human rights regimes, coordination of conservative reaction, and international trade and monetary policy.
Regime Design Matters: Intentional Oil Pollution and Treaty
Compliance (1994)
by Ronald B. Mitchell
Whether a treaty elicits compliance from governments or nonstate actors depends upon identifiable characteristics of the regime’s compliance systems. Within the international regime controlling intentional oil
pollution, a provision requiring tanker owners to install specified equipment produced dramatically higher levels of compliance than a provision
requiring tanker operators to limit their discharges. Since both provisions
entailed strong economic incentives for violation and regulated the same
countries over the same time period, the variance in compliance clearly
can be attributed to different features of the two subregimes. The equipment requirements’ success stemmed from establishing an integrated compliance system that increased transparency, provided for potent and
credible sanctions, reduced implementation costs to governments by building on existing infrastructures, and prevented violations rather than
merely deterring them.
The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources (2004)
by Kal Raustiala and David G. Victor
This article examines the implications of the rising density of international institutions. Despite the rapid proliferation of institutions,
scholars continue to embrace the assumption that individual regimes

Abstracts

xxvii

are decomposable from others. We contend that an increasingly common
phenomenon is the ‘‘regime complex’’: a collective of partially overlapping
and nonhierarchical regimes. The evolution of regime complexes reflects
the influence of legalization on world politics. Regime complexes are
laden with legal inconsistencies because the rules in one regime are
rarely coordinated closely with overlapping rules in related regimes.
Negotiators often attempt to avoid glaring inconsistencies by adopting
broad rules that allow for multiple interpretations. In turn, solutions
refined through implementation of these rules focus later rounds of
negotiation and legalization. We explore these processes using the issue
of plant genetic resources (PGR). Over the last century, states have created
property rights in these resources in a Demsetzian process: As new
technologies and ideas have made PGR far more valuable, actors have
mobilized and clashed over the creation of property rights that allow
the appropriation of that value.

Preface

This volume is intended to help readers understand the relationship
between international law and international relations (IL/IR). The
excerpted articles, all of which were first published in International
Organization, represent some of the most important research since
serious social science scholarship began in this area more than twenty
years ago. The contributions have been selected to provide readers with
a range of theoretical perspectives, concepts, and heuristics that can be
used to analyze the relationship between international law and international relations. These articles also cover some of the main topics of
international affairs. In this brief preface, we note the rise of law in
interstate relations and flag some of the most important theoretical
approaches to understanding this development. We also introduce the
topics chosen and discuss the volume’s organization.

the rise of law in international relations
The study of international law has enjoyed something of a renaissance in
the last two decades. Of course, international affairs have long been
assumed to include international legal issues. Yet, in the first third of the
twentieth century, analysts did not sharply distinguish ‘‘international
law’’ from ‘‘international relations.’’ International relations courses were
often about international law and frequently confounded the prescripts of
international law with the way states were said to behave in fact. By the
time the United States entered the Second World War, that illusory
mistake was exposed: it was clear that international legal rules and
processes had not operated the way many had hoped. The failure to
xxix

xxx

Preface

contain German and Japanese aggression, the weakness of agreements
to keep the international economy functioning, and the humanitarian
disasters of the Second World War made most observers acutely aware of
the limits of law in international affairs. For more than thirty years after
the end of the war, American political science turned its back on
international law, focusing its study of international relations on the
material interests and observed behavior of states.
Yet by the early 1980s, many international relations scholars had
rediscovered a role for law in interstate relations. Reflecting on the postwar order, many recognized that it was built not only upon power
relationships but also on explicitly negotiated agreements. These agreements in themselves increasingly piqued scholarly interest. One reason
may have been the sheer proliferation of such agreements. A century ago,
most international law was said to arise from custom – evidenced by
continuous, recurrent state practice and opinion juris (i.e., the practice
was compelled by legal obligation). For a number of reasons – including
the growth of independent states, the lack of consent implied by many
approaches to customary law, the increasingly detailed nature of international agreements, and the rise of multilateral treaty-making capacity, e.g. by various working groups of the United Nations – today, many
(if not most) international legal obligations are expressed in treaty form.
Some treaties codify customary law, but in a way that respects the express
consent of the states that are parties to them.
Figure 1 shows the number of new multilateral treaties concluded in
each quarter of the last century. While the number of new multilateral
treaties grew from 1900 to 1975 and then began to decline in the 1976–
95 period, Figure 1 strongly suggests that the aggregate number of
multilateral treaties in force has grown rapidly in the last hundred years.
Not only has the number of treaties grown, so has the scope of topics
and subjects addressed by treaty law. As Figure 1 suggests, treaty growth
has been especially marked in economic affairs, as well as in areas of
human welfare and the environment. Moreover, in the late nineteenth
century, most international law defined the rights and responsibilities of
states toward each other – purely ‘‘public’’ international law. Over the
course of the twentieth century, international law increasingly began to
address the responsibilities of states toward individuals and nonstate
actors (characteristic of human rights treaties), and set forth rules governing the relationships of private individuals and nonstate actors toward
each other – an expansion of private international law. This latter development is reflected in such important treaties as the United Nations

Preface

xxxi

Figure 1. Number of New Multilateral Treaties Concluded
Other
2500
Environment
2000

Cultural

1500

Human
Welfare

1000

Economic
Military

500

0

Political/
Diplomatic
1900–25

1926–50

1951–75

1976–95

Years

Convention on the International Sale of Goods, which is essentially
a global commercial code, and the United Nations Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, which has
enhanced the effectiveness of private international dispute settlement.
In this context, it is perhaps not surprising that the authority to
adjudicate international disputes has been delegated increasingly to
international courts. Figure 2 shows that the number of international
judicial, quasi-judicial, and dispute settlement bodies has grown from just
a handful in 1900 to nearly a hundred today. Moreover, the rate at which
dispute settlement bodies are growing has accelerated in the last 25 years.
Interstate disputes over territory, trade, human rights, environmental
protection, intellectual property, labor protection, and criminal matters
may now be resolved in international institutions that more or less resemble well-developed domestic legal systems in the way they apply legal
standards, procedures, and norms to dispute resolution. Some of these
institutions, such as the European Court of Justice (ECJ) and the World
Trade Organization’s (WTO) dispute settlement system, have compulsory
jurisdiction over member states or territories and enjoy impressive rates
of compliance with their decisions.
What explains the explosive growth of treaty law, the broader scope
of international law topics and subjects, and expansion of international venues for law-based dispute resolution? Does international law
affect the behavior of individuals, states, and nonstate actors? How

xxxii

Preface
Figure 2. Growth in International Judicial, Quasi-judicial, and
Dispute Settlement Bodies

80

Number of bodies

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Quasi-judicial and other dispute settlement bodies

Judicial bodies

does international law – and how do particular international rules and
procedures – affect interstate relations? These are some of the questions
addressed by social science and legal scholarship, of which the articles in
this volume are examples.

theories of law in international affairs
One way to understand the proliferation of legal arrangements is to view
them as an epiphenomenon of more basic relationships between states.
This is the position of scholars informed by structural realist theories: The
interests of powerful states determine the content of international
law, which in and of itself has little independent impact on behavior or
outcomes. In conceptualizing ‘‘international regimes,’’ Stephen Krasner’s
contribution in Part I of this volume sets forth this position in its pure
form (Krasner 1982). Another selection in this volume, by Downs, Rocke,
and Barsoom (1996), reflects similar skepticism about the extent to
which international law has autonomous explanatory power. Other
realist work, however, such as Steinberg (2002) and Garrett, Kelemen,
and Schulz (1998) in this volume, affords some important functions to
international law, while maintaining that law nonetheless reflects underlying power.

Preface

xxxiii

If law does simply reflect underlying power relationships, this raises
the question of why states bother to create rules to order their interactions at all. A rationalist institutionalist theory was offered in early
form by Robert Keohane (1982), an excerpt from which appears in Part I
of this volume. Using a rationalist logic that was built on the same assumptions employed by structural realism, Keohane showed that international
institutions could facilitate cooperative, positive sum outcomes that would
not otherwise occur. Keohane’s paradigmatic example was the prisoners
dilemma, which he (and others following him) argued was a metaphor for
much of international life. Rationalist argumentation that infuses legal
institutions with autonomous explanatory power has since been a mainstay of much IL/IR literature. Increasingly, rationalist institutionalist
scholarship has shifted from questions about how international law
matters to questions about why legal forms vary (see, e.g., Lipson 1991,
in this volume) and why treaty design varies (see, e.g., Smith 2000 and
Koremenos 2001, both in this volume).
Much of the early rationalist work, whether realist or institutionalist,
has treated states as unitary actors with interests that are exogenous to
the argument. This evades a crucial question: where do interests come
from? Liberal theories offer an answer: ‘‘State interests’’ are best understood as an aggregation and intermediation of individual and group
interests. International law in this view is driven from the bottom up. For
example, a selection from Andrew Moravcsik in this volume argues that
the European human rights regime expanded rapidly in the wake of the
Cold War, as nascent democracies that supported human rights protection emerged in Eastern Europe (Moravcsik 2000).
Liberalism may explain much of the content of international law, but
it affords little autonomous role to law; however, when liberal processes
are viewed as operating in the context of particular institutional arrangements, law may be afforded a crucial explanatory role. For example,
Slaughter and Mattli’s contribution to this volume shows how the ECJ
offered a path for European interests that differed from the European
Community’s legislative path, reconfiguring European interests in ways
that reshaped outcomes (Slaughter and Mattli 1993). Similarly, Keohane,
Moravcsik, and Slaughter show how variance in the legal structure of
international dispute resolution may explain the extent to which the
various processes expand international law (Keohane, Moravcsik, and
Slaughter 2000). Other selections in this volume, such as Goldstein and
Martin (2000) and Gaubatz (1996), also combine liberal and institutional
elements to generate interesting explanations.

xxxiv

Preface

Influenced by postmodern social theory, constructivists delved even
more deeply into the question: Where do interests come from? Constructivists launched an ontological attack on the rationalist work that
preceded it, claiming that neither interests nor power exists independent
of the social context in which actors are enmeshed. Interests and identity
are constructed socially; they are plastic and may be redefined. International law may be understood as both a reflection of identities and
as a social artifact that reinforces identities, interests, and power. Variations on this view are articulated by several selections in this volume,
including critiques of nonconstructivist approaches in Wendt (2001) and
Finnemore and Toope (2001) and arguments about the importance of
norms in shaping and understanding the operation of international law
by Jackson (1987), Legro (1997), and Zacher (2001).

contemporary research and the organization
of this volume
Increasingly, contemporary IL/IR research organizes less around abstract
theoretical debates and more around particular methods and concepts
that may be seen as hybrids of the main approaches. Increasingly, there is
conscious engagement across meta-theories, with a focus on mid-level
analysis of international legal and political developments using hybrid
theories and powerful methods to test those theories.
Part II of this volume is largely organized around these developments,
and newer heuristics and debates associated with them. This part highlights the distinction between making a commitment to an international
rule and compliance with it. Gaubatz (1996) introduces the ‘‘credible
commitment’’ concept (which suggests that a costly commitment by one
state may induce other states to behave differently from the way they
would otherwise behave) to the debate about treaty effects and suggests
that at least some treaty commitments by democracies may be more
credible than commitments by nondemocracies. Chayes and Chayes
(1993) present what has become known as the ‘‘managerial’’ theory of
treaty compliance, offering reasons that explain why states generally
comply with treaties. Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom (1996) offer a
skeptical counterpoint to Chayes and Chayes (1993) and others, arguing
that apparent state ‘‘compliance’’ frequently results from treaty provisions that require little more than states would do in the absence of
treaties, and that in other cases compliance is usually explained by selfinterest or enforcement pressures from powerful states.

Preface

xxxv

Part III explores the ‘‘legalization’’ of international relations, which
was the topic of a widely read IO special issue in 2000. The first contribution (Abbott et al. 2000) defines the concept of legalization. Keohane,
Moravcsik, and Slaughter (2000) argue that transnational adjudication
causes more expansive international law-making than interstate dispute
resolution. Goldstein and Martin (2000) offer reasons to be cautious
about concluding that legalization is normatively desirable. Finnemore
and Toope (2001) suggest that most of the work on ‘‘legalization’’ is
limited by its narrow definition and the associated ontological orientation, which prevents the concept from adequately accounting for the
reciprocal relationship between international law and social practice.
Part IV explores the relationship between international law and international norms. The first piece, by Robert Jackson (1987), argues that
competing definitions of sovereignty and statehood suggest that international theory must accommodate morality and legality as autonomous
variables. Legro (1997) shows that some norms affect state behavior
more than others, and he identifies factors that influenced which norms
concerning the use of force mattered most in World War II. Zacher (2001)
suggests ideational and instrumental factors that influence the strength
of norms, examining the norm against coercive territorial revisionism.
Part V considers the growing literature on treaty design and dynamics.
Three of the selections (Lipson 1991, Smith 2000, and Koremenos 2001)
offer a rationalist explanation for a particular attribute of international
agreement design – why some international agreements are informal; why
the extent of legalism in dispute settlement mechanisms varies across
agreements; and why some agreements contain escape clauses or provide
for a short duration. Wendt (2001) offers a constructivist critique of the
rationalist approach to understanding treaty design, suggesting limits of
the approach. Diehl, Ku, and Zamora (2003) present a perspective
suggesting that international law can only be understood systemically
and dynamically, by considering how international law changes (or does
not change) as norms or other political factors change.
Part VI presents two competing views of the European Court of Justice
(ECJ), which is considered by many to be the world’s most legalized and
sophisticated international court. Slaughter [Burley] and Mattli (1993) is
a classic article, using neofunctionalist theory to argue how the authority
and independence of the ECJ have grown and how the court has played an
autonomous role in European integration. Garrett, Keleman, and Schulz
(1998) challenge this view, arguing that the ECJ is so constrained by
European politics that it should not be seen as a truly autonomous actor.

xxxvi

Preface

Part VII presents some classic articles that use IL/IR theory to understand particular substantive areas of international law. This includes
articles that explore the extent to which international agreements
maintain peace after conflict (Fortna 2003), how powerful countries
use ‘‘invisible weighting’’ to influence outcomes under ‘‘consensus-based’’
decision-making rules at the World Trade Organization (Steinberg 2002),
and why governments commit themselves to particular International
Monetary Fund rules and the conditions under which they comply with
those rules (Simmons 2000). Other selections consider the politics of
war crimes tribunals (Rudolph 2001), explain the surge of commitment
to human rights regimes in postwar Europe (Moravcsik 2000), identify
treaty features that favor compliance with the international oil pollution control regime (Mitchell 1994), and explore state behavior in the
‘‘regime complex’’ of overlapping treaties governing plant genetic resources (Raustiala and Victor 2004).

conclusion
The scholarship linking international law and international relations
has developed significantly over the past three decades. International
Organization has published some of the most important research in this
area, and the articles reprinted here represent major theoretical and empirical contributions. As a testament to this dynamic area of inquiry,
new research on IL/IR is now being published in a growing range of traditional law reviews and disciplinary journals. The articles reprinted
here were important milestones toward making IL/IR a central concern
of scholarly research in international affairs.
Beth A. Simmons
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Richard H. Steinberg
Los Angeles, California

Editors’ Note

In order to offer broad coverage of theories, approaches, and topics in this
volume, each contribution has been edited down to approximately twothirds of its originally published length. The authors of each contribution
actively supported this endeavor.
While citations within articles have been maintained, complete references have been omitted from the book. However, a complete set of
references for each of the chapters in the book may be found at http//:
www.cambridge.org/9780521861861.
The deletion of originally published text is signified in this book by the
insertion of asterisks. Where three asterisks appear within or at the end of
a paragraph, part of the originally published paragraph has been deleted.
Where three asterisks appear between paragraphs, one or more paragraphs have been removed. A single asterisk marks where a footnote was
deleted. Text appearing within brackets signifies that those words have
been changed from the originally published article or added during the
editing process. Neither asterisks nor brackets appear in Chapter 4, which
was substantially revised from the original by one of its co-authors.

xxxvii

part i
INTERNATIONAL REGIMES THEORY:
DOES LAW MATTER?

1
Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes
as Intervening Variables
Stephen D. Krasner

defining regimes and regime change
* * *
Regimes can be defined as sets of implicit or explicit principles, norms,
rules, and decision-making procedures around which actors’ expectations
converge in a given area of international relations. Principles are beliefs of
fact, causation, and rectitude. Norms are standards of behavior defined
in terms of rights and obligations. Rules are specific prescriptions or
proscriptions for action. Decision-making procedures are prevailing practices for making and implementing collective choice.
This usage is consistent with other recent formulations. Keohane and
Nye, for instance, define regimes as ‘‘sets of governing arrangements’’ that
include ‘‘networks of rules, norms, and procedures that regularize behavior and control its effects.’’1 Haas argues that a regime encompasses
a mutually coherent set of procedures, rules, and norms.2 Hedley Bull,
using a somewhat different terminology, refers to the importance of rules
and institutions in international society where rules refer to ‘‘general
imperative principles which require or authorize prescribed classes of
persons or groups to behave in prescribed ways.’’3 Institutions for Bull

1

2

3

Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Power and Interdependence (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1977), p. 19.
Ernst Haas, ‘‘Technological Self-Reliance for Latin America: The OAS Contribution,’’
International Organization 34, 4 (Autumn 1980), p. 553.
Hedley Bull, The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1977), p. 54.

3

4

International Law and International Relations

help to secure adherence to rules by formulating, communicating, administering, enforcing, interpreting, legitimating, and adapting them.
Regimes must be understood as something more than temporary
arrangements that change with every shift in power or interests. Keohane
notes that a basic analytic distinction must be made between regimes and
agreements. Agreements are ad hoc, often ‘‘one-shot,’’ arrangements. The
purpose of regimes is to facilitate agreements. *** As interest and power
change, behavior changes. Waltz’s conception of the balance of power, in
which states are driven by systemic pressures to repetitive balancing
behavior, is not a regime; Kaplan’s conception, in which equilibrium
requires commitment to rules that constrain immediate, short-term power
maximization (especially not destroying an essential actor), is a regime.4
Similarly, regime-governed behavior must not be based solely on shortterm calculations of interest. Since regimes encompass principles and
norms, the utility function that is being maximized must embody some
sense of general obligation. One such principle, reciprocity, is emphasized
in Jervis’s analysis of security regimes. When states accept reciprocity they
will sacrifice short-term interests with the expectation that other actors
will reciprocate in the future, even if they are not under a specific obligation to do so. This formulation is similar to Fred Hirsch’s brilliant
discussion of friendship, in which he states: ‘‘Friendship contains an
element of direct mutual exchange and to this extent is akin to private
economic good. But it is often much more than that. Over time, the friendship ‘transaction’ can be presumed, by its permanence, to be a net benefit
on both sides. At any moment of time, though, the exchange is very unlikely to be reciprocally balanced.’’5 It is the infusion of behavior with
principles and norms that distinguishes regime-governed activity in the
international system from more conventional activity, guided exclusively
by narrow calculations of interest.
A fundamental distinction must be made between principles and norms
on the one hand, and rules and procedures on the other. Principles and
norms provide the basic defining characteristics of a regime. There may
be many rules and decision-making procedures that are consistent with
the same principles and norms. Changes in rules and decision-making
4

5

Kenneth Waltz, Theory of International Relations (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1979); Morton Kaplan, Systems and Process in International Politics (New York: Wiley,
1957), p. 23; Kaplan, Towards Professionalism in International Theory (New York: Free
Press, 1979), pp. 66–69, 73.
Fred Hirsch, The Social Limits to Growth (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976),
p. 78.

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

5

procedures are changes within regimes, provided that principles and
norms are unaltered. *** Changes in principles and norms are changes of
the regime itself. When norms and principles are abandoned, there is
either a change to a new regime or a disappearance of regimes from
a given issue-area. ***
Fundamental political arguments are more concerned with norms and
principles than with rules and procedures. Changes in the latter may be
interpreted in different ways. For instance, in the area of international
trade, recent revisions in the Articles of Agreement of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATI) provide for special and differential treatment for less developed countries (LDCs). All industrialized
countries have instituted generalized systems of preferences for LDCs.
Such rules violate one of the basic norms of the liberal postwar order,
the most-favored-nation treatment of all parties. However, the industrialized nations have treated these alterations in the rules as temporary
departures necessitated by the peculiar circumstances of poorer areas. At
American insistence the concept of graduation was formally introduced
into the GATT Articles after the Tokyo Round. Graduation holds that
as countries become more developed they will accept rules consistent
with liberal principles. Hence, Northern representatives have chosen to
interpret special and differential treatment of developing countries as
a change within the regime.
Speakers for the Third World, on the other hand, have argued that the
basic norms of the international economic order should be redistribution
and equity, not nondiscrimination and efficiency. They see the changes in
rules as changes of the regime because they identify these changes with
basic changes in principle. There is a fundamental difference between
viewing changes in rules as indications of change within the regime and
viewing these changes as indications of change between regimes. The
difference hinges on assessments of whether principles and norms have
changed as well. Such assessments are never easy because they cannot be
based on objective behavioral observations. ‘‘We know deviations from
regimes,’’ Ruggie avers, ‘‘not simply by acts that are undertaken, but by
the intentionality and acceptability attributed to those acts in the context
of an intersubjective framework of meaning.’’6
Finally, it is necessary to distinguish the weakening of a regime from
changes within or between regimes. If the principles, norms, rules, and
6

John Ruggie, ‘‘International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism
in the Postwar Economic Order,’’ International Organization 36, 2 (Spring 1982), p. 380.

6

International Law and International Relations

decision-making procedures of a regime become less coherent, or if actual
practice is increasingly inconsistent with principles, norms, rules, and
procedures, then a regime has weakened. Special and differential treatment
for developing countries is an indication that the liberal regime has weakened, even if it has not been replaced by something else. The use of diplomatic cover by spies, the bugging of embassies, the assassination of
diplomats by terrorists, and the failure to provide adequate local police
protection are all indications that the classic regime protecting foreign
envoys has weakened. However, the furtive nature of these activities
indicates that basic principles and norms are not being directly challenged.
In contrast, the seizure of American diplomats by groups sanctioned by the
Iranian government is a basic challenge to the regime itself. Iran violated
principles and norms, not just rules and procedures.7
In sum, change within a regime involves alterations of rules and
decision-making procedures, but not of norms or principles; change of a
regime involves alteration of norms and principles; and weakening of a
regime involves incoherence among the components of the regime or
inconsistency between the regime and related behavior.

do regimes matter?
*** The first attempt to analyze regimes thus assumed the following set of
causal relationships (see Figure 1.1).
BASIC CAUSAL VARIABLES

REGIMES

RELATED BEHAVIOR
AND OUTCOMES

figure 1.1

Regimes do not arise of their own accord. They are not regarded as
ends in themselves. Once in place they do affect related behavior and
outcomes. They are not merely epiphenomenal.
The independent impact of regimes is a central analytic issue. The
second causal arrow implies that regimes do matter. However, there is
no general agreement on this point, and three basic orientations can be
distinguished. The conventional structural views the regime concept [as]
useless, if not misleading. Modified structural suggests that regimes may
matter, but only under fairly restrictive conditions. And Grotian sees
7

Iran’s behavior may be rooted in an Islamic view of international relations that rejects the prevailing, European-derived regime. See Richard Rosecrance, ‘‘International
Theory Revisited,’’ International Organization 35, 4 (Autumn 1981) for a similar point.

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

7

regimes as much more pervasive, as inherent attributes of any complex,
persistent pattern of human behavior.
*** The conventional view argues that regimes, if they can be said to
exist at all, have little or no impact. They are merely epiphenomenal. The
underlying causal schematic is one that sees a direct connection between
changes in basic causal factors (whether economic or political) and
changes in behavior and outcomes. Regimes are excluded completely, or
their impact on outcomes and related behavior is regarded as trivial.
*** Structural orientations conceptualize a world of rational self-seeking
actors. The actors may be individuals, or firms, or groups, or classes, or
states. They function in a system or environment that is defined by their
own interests, power, and interaction. These orientations are resistant to
the contention that principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures have a significant impact on outcomes and behavior.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the image of the market, the
reigning analytic conceptualization for economics, the most successful of
the social sciences. A market is characterized by impersonality between
buyers and sellers, specialization in buying and selling, and exchange
based upon prices set in terms of a common medium of exchange.8 Max
Weber states that in the market ‘‘social actions are not determined by
orientation to any sort of norm which is held to be valid, nor do they rest
on custom, but entirely on the fact that the corresponding type of social
action is in the nature of the case best adapted to the normal interests of
the actors as they themselves are aware of them.’’9 The market is a world
of atomized, self-seeking egoistic individuals.
The market is a powerful metaphor for many arguments in the literature of political science, not least international relations. The recent work
of Kenneth Waltz exemplifies this orientation. For Waltz, the defining
characteristic of the international system is that its component parts
(states) are functionally similar and interact in an anarchic environment.
International systems are distinguished only by differing distributions of
relative capabilities among actors. States are assumed to act in their own
self-interest. At a minimum they ‘‘seek their own preservation and, at a
maximum, drive for universal domination.’’10 They are constrained only
by their interaction with other states in the system. Behavior is, therefore,

8

9
10

Cyril Belshaw, Traditional Exchange and Modern Markets (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1965), pp.8–9.
Max Weber, Economy and Society (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), p. 30.
Waltz, Theory of International Relations, p. 118.

8

International Law and International Relations

a function of the distribution of power among states and the position of
each particular state. When power distributions change, behavior will
also change. Regimes, for Waltz, can only be one small step removed from
the underlying power capabilities that sustain them.11
The second orientation to regimes is modified structural. *** Authors
start from a conventional structural realist perspective, a world of
sovereign states seeking to maximize their interest and power. ***
In a world of sovereign states the basic function of regimes is to
coordinate state behavior to achieve desired outcomes in particular issueareas.12 Such coordination is attractive under several circumstances. ***
If, as many have argued, there is a general movement toward a world of
complex interdependence, then the number of areas in which regimes can
matter is growing. However, regimes cannot be relevant for zero-sum
situations in which states act to maximize the difference between their
utilities and those of others. *** Pure power motivations preclude
regimes. Thus, the second orientation, modified structuralism, sees regimes
emerging and having a significant impact, but only under restrictive
conditions. It suggests that the first cut should be amended as in Figure 1.2.
b
BASIC CAUSAL VARIABLES

b
REGIMES

RELATED BEHAVIOR
AND OUTCOMES

a

figure 1.2

For most situations there is a direct link between basic causal variables
and related behavior (path a); but under circumstances that are not purely
conflictual, where individual decision making leads to suboptimal outcomes, regimes may be significant (path b).13
The third approach to regimes *** reflects a fundamentally different
view of international relations than the two structural arguments just
described. ***
11

12

13

Ibid., especially chapters 5 and 6. This conventional structuralist view for the realist
school has its analog in Marxist analysis to studies that focus exclusively on technology
and economic structure.
Vinod K. Aggarwal emphasizes this point. See his ‘‘Hanging by a Thread: International
Regime Change in the Textile/Apparel System, 1950–1979,’’ Ph.D. diss., Stanford
University, 1981, chap. 1.
The modified structural arguments are based upon a realist analysis of international
relations. In the Marxist tradition this position has its analog in many structural Marxist
writings, which emphasize the importance of the state and ideology as institutions that
act to rationalize and legitimate fundamental economic structures.

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

9

* * *
While the modified structural approach does not view the perfect
market as a regime, because action there is based purely upon individual
calculation without regard to the behavior of others, the third orientation
does regard the market as a regime. Patterns of behavior that persist over
extended periods are infused with normative significance. A market cannot
be sustained by calculations of self-interest alone. It must be, in Ruggie’s
terms, embedded in a broader social environment that nurtures and
sustains the conditions necessary for its functioning. Even the balance of
power, regarded by conventional structural realist analysts as a purely
conflictual situation, can be treated as a regime.14 The causal schema
suggested by a Grotian orientation either closely parallels the first cut
shown in Figure 1.1, or can be depicted as in Figure 1.3.
REGIMES
BASIC CAUSAL VARIABLES
RELATED PATTERNED BEHAVIOR

figure 1.3

Patterned behavior reflecting calculations of interest tends to lead to
the creation of regimes, and regimes reinforce patterned behavior. ***
States are (rarified) abstractions. Elites have transnational as well as
national ties. Sovereignty is a behavioral variable, not an analytic assumption. The ability of states to control movements across their borders and to
maintain dominance over all aspects of the international system is limited. Security and state survival are not the only objectives. Force does not
occupy a singularly important place in international politics. Elites act
within a communications net, embodying rules, norms, and principles,
which transcends national boundaries.
This minimalist Grotian orientation has informed a number of theoretical postulates developed during the postwar period. Functionalism saw the
possibility of eroding sovereignty through the multiplication of particularistic interests across national boundaries. Karl Deutsch’s 1957 study of
integration, with its emphasis on societal communication, made a distinction
between security communities and anarchy.15 Some authors associated
14
15

Bull, The Anarchical Society, chap. 5.
See Arend Lijphart, ‘‘The Structure of the Theoretical Revolution in International
Relations,’’ International Studies Quarterly 18, 1 (March 1974), pp. 64–65, for the
development of this argument.

10

International Law and International Relations

with the concept of transnationalism have posited a web of interdependence that makes any emphasis on sovereignty analytically misleading and
normatively questionable. Keohane and Nye’s discussion of complex
interdependence rejects the assumptions of the primacy of force and issue
hierarchy assumed by a realist perspective.16 Ernst Haas points out that
what he calls organic theories – eco-environmentalism, eco-reformism, and
egalitarianism – deny conventional power-oriented assumptions.
*** The issue is not so much whether one accepts the possibility of
principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures affecting outcomes and behavior, as what one’s basic assumption is about the normal
state of international affairs. Adherents of a Grotian perspective accept
regimes as a pervasive and significant phenomenon in the international
system. Adherents of a structural realist orientation see regimes as a
phenomenon whose presence cannot be assumed and whose existence
requires careful explanation. The two ‘‘standard cases’’ are fundamentally
different, and it is the definition of the standard case that identifies the basic
theoretical orientation. *** From a realist perspective, regimes are phenomena that need to be explained; from a Grotian perspective, they are
data to be described.
In sum, conventional structural arguments do not take regimes seriously: if basic causal variables change, regimes will also change. Regimes
have no independent impact on behavior. Modified structural arguments,
represented here by a number of adherents of a realist approach to international relations, see regimes as mattering only when independent decision making leads to undesired outcomes. Finally, Grotian perspectives
accept regimes as a fundamental part of all patterned human interaction,
including behavior in the international system.

explanations for regime development
* * *
1. Egoistic Self-Interest
The prevailing explanation for the existence of international regimes
is egoistic self-interest. By egoistic self-interest I refer to the desire to
maximize one’s own utility function where that function does not include
the utility of another party. The egoist is concerned with the behavior of
16

Keohane and Nye, Power and Interdependence, especially chap. 8.

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

11

others only insofar as that behavior can affect the egoist’s utility. All contractarian political theories from Hobbes to Rawls are based on egoistic
self-interest. In contrast, pure power seekers are interested in maximizing
the difference between their power capabilities and those of their opponent.
* * *
*** It is not so clear that coordination involves regimes. Coordination
may only require the construction of rules. If these rules are not informed
by any proximate principles or norms, they will not conform to the definition of regimes set forth earlier. ***
[The benefits provided by regimes are likely to outweigh the costs of
regime formation and maintenance when there is asymmetric information,
moral hazard, potential dishonesty, or high issue density. In addition, the
costs of forming regimes will be lower when there is a high level of formal
and informal communication among states, a condition more likely to be
found in open political systems operating under conditions of complex
interdependence. *** Hence calculations of egoistic self-interest emerge
as central elements in most of the [chapters] in this [book].
2. Political Power
The second major basic causal variable used to explain regime development is political power. Two different orientations toward power can be
distinguished. The first is cosmopolitan and instrumental: power is used
to secure optimal outcomes for the system as a whole. In game-theoretic
terms power is used to promote joint maximization. It is power in the
service of the common good. The second approach is particularistic and
potentially consummatory. Power is used to enhance the values of specific actors within the system. These values may include increasing power
capabilities as well as promoting economic or other objectives. In gametheoretic terms power is used to maximize individual payoffs. It is power
in the service of particular interests.
a. Power in the Service of the Common Good
The first position is represented by a long tradition in classical and
neoclassical economics associated with the provision of public goods.
The hidden hand was Adam Smith’s most compelling construct: the good
of all from the selfishness of each; there could be no more powerful defense
of egoism. But Smith recognized that it was necessary for the state to
provide certain collective goods. These included defense, the maintenance
of order, minimum levels of welfare, public works, the protection of infant

12

International Law and International Relations

industries, and standards for commodities.17 Economists have pointed to the
importance of the state for establishing property rights and enforcing
contracts; that is, creating conditions that prevent predatory as opposed to
market behavior. The state must create institutions that equate public and
private rates of return.18 Keynesian analysis gives the state a prominent role
in managing macroeconomic variables. For all of these arguments the
purpose of state action is to further general societal interests.
* * *
b. Power in the Service of Particular Interests
*** A game-theoretic analogy makes it easier to distinguish between two
important variants of the viewpoint of power in the service of particular interests. The first assumes that payoffs are fixed and that an actor’s
choice of strategy is autonomously determined solely by these payoffs. The
second assumes that power can be used to alter payoffs and influence
actor strategy.
The first approach closely follows the analysis that applies when purely
cosmopolitan objectives are at stake, except that political power is used to
maximize individual, not joint, payoffs. Under certain configurations of
interest, there is an incentive to create regimes and the provision of
these regimes is a function of the distribution of power. *** [Keohane has]
argued that hegemons play a critical role in supplying the collective goods
that are needed for regimes to function effectively.19 Hegemons provide
17

18

19

There is a lively debate over precisely how much of a role Smith accords to the state. Some
(see for instance Albert Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests [Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1977], pp. 103–104) maintain that Smith wanted to limit the folly of
government by having it do as little as possible. Others (see for instance Colin Holmes,
‘‘Laissez-faire in Theory and Practice: Britain 1800–1875,’’ Journal of European
Economic History 5, 3 [1976], p. 673; and Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, ‘‘Delinking North
and South: Unshackled or Unhinged,’’ in Albert Fishlow et al., Rich and Poor Nations
in the World Economy [New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978], pp. 124–25) have taken the
intermediate position endorsed here. Others see Smith trying to establish conditions for
a moral society that must be based on individual choice, for which a materialistically
oriented, egoistically maintained economic system is only instrumental. See, for instance,
Leonard Billet, ‘‘The Just Economy: The Moral Basis of the Wealth of Nations,’’ Review
of Social Economy 34 (December 1974).
Jack Hirschleifer, ‘‘Economics from a Biological Viewpoint,’’ Journal of Law and
Economics 20 (April 1977); Weber, Economy and Society, pp. 336–37; Douglass C.
North and Robert Paul Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), chap. 1.
Robert O. Keohane, ‘‘The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes in International
Economic Regimes, 1967–77,’’ in Ole R. Holsti et al., Changes in the International
System (Boulder, Col.: Westview, 1980).

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

13

these goods not because they are interested in the well-being of the system
as a whole, but because regimes enhance their own national values. ***
The theory of hegemonic leadership suggests that under conditions
of declining hegemony there will be a weakening of regimes. Without
leadership, principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures cannot easily be upheld. No one actor will be willing to provide the collective
goods needed to make the regime work smoothly and effectively. *** On
the other hand, *** as hegemony declines there will be greater incentives
for collaboration because collective goods are no longer being provided
by the hegemon. The international system more closely resembles an
oligopoly than a perfect market. Actors are aware of how their behavior
affects others. When smaller states perceive that a hegemon is no longer
willing to offer a free ride, they are likely to become paying customers. ***
The second line of argument associated with power in the service of
specific interests investigates the possibility that powerful actors may be
able to alter the pay-offs that confront other actors or influence the strategies they choose. Here power becomes a much more central concept – the
element of compulsion is close at hand. Weaker actors may not be able to
make autonomous choices. The values assigned to a particular cell may
be changed.
* * *
When a hegemonic state acts to influence the strategy of other actors,
the regime is held hostage to the persistence of the existing distribution of
power in the international system. If the hegemon’s relative capabilities
decline, the regime will collapse. *** For instance, the norms of the
colonial regime collapsed because the power of its supporter, the major
European states, eroded. This set of arguments about regime change and
hegemonic decline differs from the analysis emerging from a focus on the
provision of collective goods for either cosmopolitan or particularistic
reasons. Here a decline in power leads to a change in regime because the
hegemon is no longer able to control the payoff matrix or influence the
strategies of the weak, not because there is no actor to provide the collective goods needed for efficient regime functioning.

3. Norms and Principles
To this point in the discussion, norms and principles have been treated as
endogenous: they are the critical defining characteristics of any given
regime. However, norms and principles that influence the regime in

14

International Law and International Relations

a particular issue-area but are not directly related to that issue-area can
also be regarded as explanations for the creation, persistence, and dissipation of regimes. The most famous example of such a formulation is
Max Weber’s Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Weber argues
that the rise of capitalism is intimately associated with the evolution of
a Calvinist religious doctrine that fosters hard work while enjoining
profligacy and uses worldly success as an indication of predestined fate.20
Fred Hirsch has argued that without precapitalist values such as hard
work, self-sacrifice, loyalty, and honor, capitalist systems would fall
apart. Such values are critical constraints on self-interested calculations
that would too often lead to untrustworthy and dishonest behavior.21
Financing by various pariah groups around the world offers a clear
example of the way in which noneconomic norms have facilitated market
activity. For instance, bills of exchange were devised by Jewish bankers
during the late Middle Ages to avoid violence and extortion from the
nobility: safer to carry a piece of paper than to carry specie. However, the
piece of paper had to be honored by the recipient. This implied a high
level of trust and such trust was enhanced by conventions: established
practices were reinforced by the exclusionary nature of the group, which
facilitated surveillance and the application of sanctions. The importance of
conventions for the use of bills of exchange is reflected in the fact that they
were frequently used in the Mediterranean basin in the 16th century but
they were not used at the interface with the non-Mediterranean world in
Syria where, according to Braudel, ‘‘two mutually suspicious worlds met
face to face.’’ Here all dealings were in barter, or gold and silver.22
* * *
Discussion by other authors suggests that there is a hierarchy of regimes.
Diffuse principles and norms, such as hard work as a service to God,
condition behavior in specific issue-areas. In international relations, the
most important diffuse principle is sovereignty. Hedley Bull refers to
20

21

22

See David Laitin, ‘‘Religion, Political Culture, and the Weberian Tradition,’’ World
Politics 30, 4 (July 1978), especially pp. 568–69. For another discussion of noneconomic
values in the rise of capitalism see Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests.
Hirsch, The Social Limits to Growth, chap. 11. See also Michael Walzer, ‘‘The Future of
Intellectuals and the Rise of the New Class,’’ New York Review of Books 27 (20 March
1980).
Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip
II (New York: Harper, 1975), p. 370. For the tie between bills of exchange and Jewish
bankers see Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests, p. 72, and Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Modern World-System (New York: Academic Press, 1974), p. 147.

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

15

sovereignty as the constitutive principle of the present international
system. The concept of exclusive control within a delimited geographic
area and the untrammeled right to self-help internationally, which
emerged out of late medieval Europe, have come to pervade the modern
international system.23
In this usage sovereignty is not an analytic assumption, it is a principle
that influences the behavior of actors. With a few exceptions, such as
Antarctica, Namibia, and the West Bank, sovereignty prevails. Those areas
where sovereignty is not applied are governed by vulnerable regimes or
lack regimes altogether. Sovereignty designates states as the only actors
with unlimited rights to act in the international system. Assertions by
other agencies are subject to challenge. If the constitutive principle of
sovereignty were altered, it is difficult to imagine that any other international regime would remain unchanged.
4. Usage and Custom
The last two sets of causal variables affecting regime development are
usage and custom, and knowledge. Usage and custom will be discussed in
this section, knowledge in the next. Usage and custom, and knowledge, are
not treated in this [book] as exogenous variables capable of generating
a regime on their own. Rather, they supplement and reinforce pressures
associated with egoistic self-interest, political power, and diffuse values.
Usage refers to regular patterns of behavior based on actual practice;
custom, to long-standing practice.24 *** Patterned behavior accompanied
by shared expectations is likely to become infused with normative
significance: actions based purely on instrumental calculations can come
to be regarded as rule-like or principled behavior. They assume legitimacy.
A great deal of western commercial law, in fact, developed out of custom
and usage initially generated by self-interest. Practices that began as ad hoc
private arrangements later became the basis for official commercial law.25
*** Certain patterns of behavior are first adopted because they promote
individual utility. Once established, such practices are reinforced by the
growth of regimes. Most American drivers (outside New York City) would
23
24
25

Bull, The Anarchical Society, pp. 8–9, 70.
Weber, Economy and Society, p. 29.
Leon E. Trakman, ‘‘The Evolution of the Law Merchant: Our Commercial Heritage,’’
Part I, Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 12, 1 (October 1980) and Part II, ibid.,
12, 2 (January 1981); Harold Berman and Colin Kaufman, ‘‘The Law of International
Commercial Transactions (Lex Mercatoria),’’ Harvard International Law Journal 19,
1 (Winter 1978).

16

International Law and International Relations

feel at least a twinge of discomfort at driving illegally through a red light
at an empty intersection. Behavior that was originally only a matter
of egoistic self-interest is now buttressed by widely shared norms. *** A
pattern of behavior initially established by economic coercion or force may
come to be regarded as legitimate by those on whom it has been imposed.
Usage leads to shared expectations, which become infused with principles
and norms.
5. Knowledge
The final variable used to explain the development of regimes is knowledge. Like usage and custom, knowledge is usually treated as an intervening, not an exogenous, variable. In an earlier study Ernst Haas, a
prominent exponent of the importance of knowledge, defined knowledge as ‘‘the sum of technical information and of theories about that information which commands sufficient consensus at a given time among
interested actors to serve as a guide to public policy designed to achieve
some social goal.’’26 In another essay Haas points to the potentialities
inherent in a stance of ‘‘cognitive evolutionism,’’ which emphasizes
sensitivity to the consequences of the generation of new knowledge.27
Knowledge creates a basis for cooperation by illuminating complex
interconnections that were not previously understood. Knowledge can
not only enhance the prospects for convergent state behavior, it can also
transcend ‘‘prevailing lines of ideological cleavage.’’28 It can provide
a common ground for both what Haas calls mechanical approaches (most
conventional social science theories) and organic approaches (egalitarianism and various environmentally-oriented arguments).
For knowledge to have an independent impact in the international
system, it must be widely accepted by policy makers. *** Without consensus, knowledge can have little impact on regime development in a
world of sovereign states. If only some parties hold a particular set of
beliefs, their significance is completely mediated by the power of their
adherents.
* * *

26

Ernst Haas, ‘‘Why Collaborate? Issue-Linkage and International Regimes,’’ World
Politics 32, 3 (April 1980), pp. 367–68.
27
[Ernst B. Haas, ‘‘Words Can Hurt You; Or, Who Said What to Whom about Regimes,
International Organization 36, 2 (Spring 1982).]
[28 Haas, ‘‘Why Collaborate?’’, p. 368.]

Structural Causes and Regime Consequences

17

The two most prominent exogenous variables are egoistic self-interest,
usually economic, and political power. In addition, diffuse values and
norms such as sovereignty and private property may condition behavior
within specific issue-areas. Finally, usage and custom and knowledge may
contribute to the development of regimes.

conclusion
*** The Grotian perspective *** sees regimes as a pervasive facet of social
interaction. It is catholic in its description of the underlying causes of
regimes. Interests, power, diffuse norms, customs, and knowledge may all
play a role in regime formation. These causal factors may be manifest
through the behavior of individuals, particular bureaucracies, and international organizations, as well as states.
The structural realist orientation is *** more circumspect. The exemplar or standard case for the realist perspective does not include international regimes. Regimes arise only under restrictive conditions
characterized by the failure of individual decision making to secure desired
outcomes. The basic causal variables that lead to the creation of regimes
are power and interest. The basic actors are states. ***
[Modified structural orientations] reject a narrow structural analysis
that posits a direct relationship between changes in basic causal variables
and related behavior and outcomes, and denies the utility of the regime
concept. *** However, the basic parametric constraints for these analyses
are identical with those applied by more conventional structural arguments. The basic analytic assumptions are the same. Arguments that treat
regimes as intervening variables, and regard state interests and state power
as basic causal variables, fall unambiguously within the structural realist
paradigm. A more serious departure from structural reasoning occurs
when regimes are seen as autonomous variables independently affecting
not only related behavior and outcomes, but also the basic causal variables
that led to their creation in the first place. ***

2
The Demand for International Regimes
Robert O. Keohane

We study international regimes because we are interested in understanding order in world politics. Conflict may be the rule; if so, institutionalized
patterns of cooperation are particularly in need of explanation. The theoretical analysis of international regimes begins with what is at least an
apparent anomaly from the standpoint of Realist theory: the existence of
many ‘‘sets of implicit or explicit principles, norms, rules, and decisionmaking procedures around which actor expectations converge,’’ in a variety of areas of international relations.
This article constitutes an attempt to improve our understanding
of international order, and international cooperation, through an interpretation of international regime formation that relies heavily on
rational-choice analysis in the utilitarian social contract tradition. I explore why self-interested actors in world politics should seek, under

The original idea for this paper germinated in discussions at a National Science Foundationsponsored conference on International Politics and International Economics held in
Minneapolis, Minnesota, in June 1978.
I am indebted to Robert Holt and Anne Krueger for organizing and to the NSF for funding
that meeting. Several knowledgeable friends, particularly Charles Kindleberger, Timothy J.
McKeown, James N. Rosse, and Laura Tyson, provided bibliographical suggestions that
helped me think about the issues discussed here. For written comments on earlier versions of
this article I am especially grateful to Robert Bates, John Chubb, John Conybeare, Colin Day,
Alex Field, Albert Fishlow, Alexander George, Ernst B. Haas, Gerald Helleiner, Harold K.
Jacobson, Robert Jervis, Stephen D. Krasner, Helen Milner, Timothy J. McKeown, Robert C.
North, John Ruggie, Ken Shepsle, Arthur Stein, Susan Strange, Harrison Wagner, and David
Yoffie. I also benefited from discussions of earlier drafts at meetings held at Los Angeles in
October 1980 and at Palm Springs in February 1981, and from colloquia in Berkeley,
California, and Cambridge, Massachusetts.

18

The Demand for International Regimes

19

certain circumstances, to establish international regimes through mutual
agreement; and how we can account for fluctuations over time in the
number, extent, and strength of international regimes, on the basis of
rational calculation under varying circumstances.
Previous work on this subject in the rational-choice tradition has
emphasized the ‘‘theory of hegemonic stability’’: that is, the view that
concentration of power in one dominant state facilitates the development of
strong regimes, and that fragmentation of power is associated with regime
collapse.1 This theory, however, fails to explain lags between changes in
power structures and changes in international regimes; does not account
well for the differential durability of different institutions within a given
issue-area; and avoids addressing the question of why international regimes
seem so much more extensive now in world politics than during earlier
periods (such as the late 19th century) of supposed hegemonic leadership.2
The argument of this article seeks to correct some of these faults of the
hegemonic stability theory by incorporating it within a supply-demand
approach that borrows extensively from microeconomic theory. The theory of hegemonic stability can be viewed as focusing only on the supply
of international regimes: according to the theory, the more concentrated
power is in an international system, the greater the supply of international
regimes at any level of demand.3 But fluctuations in demand for international regimes are not taken into account by the theory; thus it is
necessarily incomplete. This article focuses principally on the demand for
international regimes in order to provide the basis for a more comprehensive and balanced interpretation.
1

2

3

See especially Robert O. Keohane, ‘‘The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes in
International Economic Regimes, 1967–1977,’’ in Ole R. Holsti, Randolph Siverson, and
Alexander George, eds., Changes in the International System (Boulder: Westview, 1980);
and Linda Cahn, ‘‘National Power and International Regimes: The United States and
International Commodity Markets,’’ Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 1980.
Current research on the nineteenth century is beginning to question the assumption that
Britain was hegemonic in a meaningful sense. See Timothy J. McKeown, ‘‘Hegemony
Theory and Trade in the Nineteenth Century,’’ paper presented to the International
Studies Association convention, Philadelphia, 18–21 March 1981; and Arthur A. Stein,
‘‘The Hegemon’s Dilemma: Great Britain, the United States, and the International
Economic Order,’’ paper presented to the American Political Science Association annual
meeting, New York, 3–6 September 1981.
The essential reason for this (discussed below) is that actors that are large relative to the
whole set of actors have greater incentives both to provide collective goods themselves
and to organize their provision, than do actors that are small relative to the whole set.
The classic discussion of this phenomenon appears in Mancur Olson Jr., The Logic of
Collective Action: Political Goods and the Theory of Groups (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1965).

20

International Law and International Relations

Emphasizing the demand for international regimes focuses our attention on why we should want them in the first place, rather than taking their
desirability as a given. I do not assume that ‘‘demand’’ and ‘‘supply’’ can be
specified independently and operationalized as in microeconomics. The
same actors are likely to be the ‘‘demanders’’ and the ‘‘suppliers.’’ Furthermore, factors affecting the demand for international regimes are likely
simultaneously to affect their supply as well. Yet supply and demand
language allows us to make a distinction that is useful in distinguishing
phenomena that, in the first instance, affect the desire for regimes, on the one
hand, or the ease of supplying them, on the other. ‘‘Supply and demand’’
should be seen in this analysis as a metaphor, rather than an attempt
artificially to separate, or to reify, different aspects of an interrelated process.4
* * *

1. systemic constraint-choice analysis: virtues
and limitations
The argument developed here is deliberately limited to the systemic level
of analysis. In a systemic theory, the actors’ characteristics are given by
assumption, rather than treated as variables; changes in outcomes are
explained not on the basis of variations in these actor characteristics,
but on the basis of changes in the attributes of the system itself. Microeconomic theory, for instance, posits the existence of business firms,
with given utility functions, and attempts to explain their behavior on
the basis of environmental factors such as the competitiveness of markets.
It is therefore a systemic theory, unlike the so-called ‘‘behavioral theory of
the firm,’’ which examines the actors for internal variations that could
account for behavior not predicted by microeconomic theory.
A systemic focus permits a limitation of the number of variables that
need to be considered. In the initial steps of theory-building, this is a great
advantage: attempting to take into account at the outset factors at the
foreign policy as well as the systemic level would lead quickly to descriptive
complexity and theoretical anarchy. Beginning the analysis at the systemic
level establishes a baseline for future work. By seeing how well a simple
model accounts for behavior, we understand better the value of introducing more variables and greater complexity into the analysis. Without the
systemic microeconomic theory of the firm, for instance, it would not

4

I am indebted to Albert Fishlow for clarifying this point for me.

The Demand for International Regimes

21

have been clear what puzzles needed to be solved by an actor-oriented
behavioral theory.
* * *
This analysis follows the tradition of microeconomic theory by focusing
on constraints and incentives that affect the choices made by actors.5 We
assume that, in general, actors in world politics tend to respond rationally
to constraints and incentives. Changes in the characteristics of the
international system will alter the opportunity costs to actors of various
courses of action, and will therefore lead to changes in behavior. In
particular, decisions about creating or joining international regimes will
be affected by system-level changes in this way; in this model the demand
for international regimes is a function of system characteristics.
This article therefore employs a form of rational-choice analysis, which
I prefer to term ‘‘constraint-choice’’ analysis to indicate that I do not make
some of the extreme assumptions often found in the relevant literature.
I assume a prior context of power, expectations, values, and conventions;
I do not argue that rational-choice analysis can derive international
regimes from a ‘‘state of nature’’ through logic alone.6 This paper also
eschews de-terministic claims, or the hubris of believing that a complete
explanation can be developed through resort to deductive models. To
believe this would commit one to a narrowly rationalistic form of analysis
in which expectations of gain provide both necessary and sufficient explanations of behavior.7 Such beliefs in the power of Benthamite calculation
have been undermined by the insufficiency of microeconomic theories of
the firm – despite their great value as initial approximations – as shown by
the work of organization theorists such as Simon, Cyert, and March.8
5

6

7

8

Stimulating discussions of microeconomic theory can be found in Martin Shubik, ‘‘A
Curmudgeon’s Guide to Microeconomics,’’ Journal of Economic Literature 8 (1970):
405–434; and Spiro J. Latsis, ‘‘A Research Progrmme in Economics,’’ in Latsis, ed.,
Method and Appraisal in Economics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976).
I am indebted to Alexander J. Field for making the importance of this point clear to
me. See his paper, ‘‘The Problem with Neoclassical Institutional Economics: A Critique
with Special Reference to the North/Thomas Model of Pre–1500 Europe,’’ Explorations
in Economic History 18 (April 1981).
Lance E. Davis and Douglass C. North adopt this strong form of rationalistic explanation when they argue that ‘‘an institutional arrangement will be innovated if the expected net gains exceed the expected costs.’’ See their volume, Institutional Change and
American Economic Growth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
Two of the classic works are James March and Herbert Simon, Organizations (New
York: Wiley, 1958); and Richard Cyert and James March, The Behavioral Theory of the
Firm (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963).

22

International Law and International Relations

Rational-choice theory is not advanced here as a magic key to unlock
the secrets of international regime change, much less as a comprehensive
way of interpreting reality. Nor do I employ it as a means of explaining
particular actions of specific actors. Rather, I use rational-choice theory to
develop models that help to explain trends or tendencies toward which
patterns of behavior tend to converge. That is, I seek to account for
typical, or modal, behavior. This analysis will not accurately predict the
decisions of all actors, or what will happen to all regimes; but it should
help to account for overall trends in the formation, growth, decay, and
dissolution of regimes. The deductive logic of this approach makes it possible to generate hypotheses about international regime change on an
a priori basis. In this article several such hypotheses will be suggested,
although their testing will have to await further specification. We shall
therefore be drawing on microeconomic theories and rational-choice approaches heuristically, to help us construct nontrivial hypotheses about
international regime change that can guide future research.
The use of rational-choice theory implies that we must view decisions
involving international regimes as in some meaningful sense voluntary.
Yet we know that world politics is a realm in which power is exercised
regularly and in which inequalities are great. How, then, can we analyze
international regimes with a voluntaristic mode of analysis?
My answer is to distinguish two aspects of the process by which
international regimes come into being: the imposition of constraints, and
decision making. Constraints are dictated not only by environmental
factors but also by powerful actors. Thus when we speak of an ‘‘imposed
regime,’’ we are speaking (in my terminology) of a regime agreed upon
within constraints that are mandated by powerful actors.9 Any agreement
that results from bargaining will be affected by the opportunity costs of
alternatives faced by the various actors: that is, by which party has the
greater need for agreement with the other.10 Relationships of power and
dependence in world politics will therefore be important determinants of
the characteristics of international regimes. Actor choices will be constrained in such a way that the preferences of more powerful actors will
9

10

For a discussion of ‘‘spontaneous,’’ ‘‘negotiated,’’ and ‘‘imposed’’ regimes, see Oran
Young’s contribution to this volume.
For a lucid and original discussion based on this obvious but important point, see John
Harsanyi, ‘‘Measurement of Social Power, Opportunity Costs and the Theory of TwoPerson Bargaining Games,’’ Behavioral Science 7, 1 (1962): 67–80. See also Albert O.
Hirschman, National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade (1945; Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1980), especially pp. 45–48.

The Demand for International Regimes

23

be accorded greater weight. Thus in applying rational-choice theory to the
formation and maintenance of international regimes, we have to be continually sensitive to the structural context within which agreements are
made. Voluntary choice does not imply equality of situation or outcome.
We do not necessarily sacrifice realism when we analyze international
regimes as the products of voluntary agreements among independent
actors within the context of prior constraints. Constraint-choice analysis
effectively captures the nonhierarchical nature of world politics without
ignoring the role played by power and inequality. Within this analytical
framework, a systemic analysis that emphasizes constraints on choice
and effects of system characteristics on collective outcomes provides an
appropriate way to address the question of regime formation.
Constraint-choice analysis emphasizes that international regimes should
not be seen as quasi-governments – imperfect attempts to institutionalize
centralized authority relationships in world politics. Regimes are more
like contracts, when these involve actors with long-term objectives who
seek to structure their relationships in stable and mutually beneficial
ways.11 In some respects, regimes resemble the ‘‘quasi-agreements’’ that
Fellner discusses when analyzing the behavior of oligopolistic firms.12
In both contracts and quasi-agreements, there may be specific rules
having to do with prices, quantities, delivery dates, and the like; for contracts, some of these rules may be legally enforceable. The most important functions of these arrangements, however, are not to preclude
further negotiations, but to establish stable mutual expectations about
others’ patterns of behavior and to develop working relationships that
will allow the parties to adapt their practices to new situations. Rules of
international regimes are frequently changed, bent, or broken to meet the
exigencies of the moment. They are rarely enforced automatically, and
they are not self-executing. Indeed, they are often matters for negotiation
and renegotiation; as Puchala has argued, ‘‘attempts to enforce EEC
regulations open political cleavages up and down the supranational-tolocal continuum and spark intense politicking along the cleavage lines.’’13
* * *
11

12
13

S. Todd Lowry, ‘‘Bargain and Contract Theory in Law and Economics,’’ in Warren J.
Samuels, ed., The Economy as a System of Power (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction
Books, 1979), p. 276.
William Fellner, Competition among the Few (New York: Knopf, 1949).
Donald J. Puchala, ‘‘Domestic Politics and Regional Harmonization in the European
Communities,’’ World Politics 27,4 (July 1975), p. 509.

24

International Law and International Relations

2. the context and functions of international regimes
Analysis of international regime formation within a constraint-choice
framework requires that one specify the nature of the context within
which actors make choices and the functions of the institutions whose
patterns of growth and decay are being explained. Two features of the
international context are particularly important: world politics lacks
authoritative governmental institutions, and is characterized by pervasive uncertainty. Within this setting, a major function of international
regimes is to facilitate the making of mutually beneficial agreements
among governments, so that the structural condition of anarchy does
not lead to a complete ‘‘war of all against all.’’
The actors in our model operate within what Waltz has called a ‘‘selfhelp system,’’ in which they cannot call on higher authority to resolve
difficulties or provide protection.14 Negative externalities are common:
states are forever impinging on one another’s interests.15 In the absence of
authoritative global institutions, these conflicts of interest produce
uncertainty and risk: possible future evils are often even more terrifying than present ones. All too obvious with respect to matters of war
and peace, this is also characteristic of the international economic
environment.
Actors in world politics may seek to reduce conflicts of interest and
risk by coordinating their behavior. Yet coordination has many of the
characteristics of a public good, which leads us to expect that its production will be too low.16 That is, increased production of these goods,
which would yield net benefits, is not undertaken. This insight is the basis
of the major ‘‘supply-side’’ argument about international regimes, epitomized by the theory of hegemonic stability. According to this line of argument, hegemonic international systems should be characterized by
levels of public goods production higher than in fragmented systems; and,

14

15

16

Kenneth N. Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1979).
Externalities exist whenever an acting unit does not bear all of the costs, or fails to reap
all of the benefits, that result from its behavior. See Davis and North, Institutional Change
and American Economic Growth, p. 16.
Olson, The Logic of Collection Action; Bruce M. Russett and John D. Sullivan,
‘‘Collective Goods and International Organization,’’ with a comment by Mancur Olson
Jr., International Organization 25,4 (Autumn 1971); John Gerard Ruggie, ‘‘Collective
Goods and Future International Collaboration,’’ American Political Science Review 66,
3 (September 1972); Duncan Snidal, ‘‘Public Goods, Property Rights, and Political
Organization,’’ International Studies Quarterly 23,4 (December 1979), p. 544.

The Demand for International Regimes

25

if international regimes provide public goods, by stronger and more
extensive international regimes.17
This argument, important though it is, ignores what I have called the
‘‘demand’’ side of the problem of international regimes: why should governments desire to institute international regimes in the first place, and
how much will they be willing to contribute to maintain them? Addressing
these issues will help to correct some of the deficiencies of the theory of
hegemonic stability, which derive from its one-sidedness, and will contribute to a more comprehensive interpretation of international regime change.
The familiar context of world politics – its competitiveness, uncertainty,
and conflicts of interest – not only sets limits on the supply of international
regimes, but provides a basis for understanding why they are demanded.
Before we can understand why regimes are demanded, however, it is
necessary to establish what the functions of international regimes, from the
perspective of states, might be.18
At the most specific level, students of international cooperation are
interested in myriads of particular agreements made by governments: to
maintain their exchange rates within certain limits, to refrain from trade
discrimination, to reduce their imports of petroleum, or progressively to
reduce tariffs. These agreements are made despite the fact that, compared
to domestic political institutions, the institutions of world politics are
extremely weak: an authoritative legal framework is lacking and regularized institutions for conducting transactions (such as markets backed
by state authority or binding procedures for making and enforcing contracts) are often poorly developed.
17

18

Keohane, ‘‘The Theory of Hegemonic Stability’’; Charles P. Kindleberger, The World in
Depression, 1929–1939 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974); Mancur Olson
and Richard Zeckhauser, ‘‘An Economic Theory of Alliances,’’ Review of Economics
and Statistics 48,3 (August 1966), reprinted in Bruce M. Russett, ed., Economic Theories
of International Politics (Chicago: Markham, 1968). For a critical appraisal of work
placing emphasis on public goods as a rationale for forming international organizations,
see John A. C. Conybeare, ‘‘International Organizations and the Theory of Property
Rights,’’ International Organization 34,3 (Summer 1980), especially pp. 329–32.
My use of the word ‘‘functions’’ here is meant to designate consequences of a certain
pattern of activity, particularly in terms of the utility of the activity; it is not to be
interpreted as an explanation of the behavior in question, since there is no teleological
premise, or assumption that necessity is involved. Understanding the function of international regimes helps, however, to explain why actors have an incentive to create
them, and may therefore help to make behavior intelligible within a rational-choice mode
of analysis that emphasizes the role of incentives and constraints. For useful distinctions on functionalism, see Ernest Nagel, The Structure of Scientific Explanation (New
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1961), especially ‘‘Functionalism and Social Science,’’ pp. 520–35.
I am grateful to Robert Packenham for this reference and discussions of this point.

26

International Law and International Relations

Investigation of the sources of specific agreements reveals that they
are not, in general, made on an ad hoc basis, nor do they follow a random pattern. Instead, they are ‘‘nested’’ within more comprehensive agreements, covering more issues. An agreement among the United States,
Japan, and the European Community in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations to reduce a particular tariff is affected by the rules, norms,
principles, and procedures of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) – that is, by the trade regime. The trade regime, in turn, is nested
within a set of other arrangements – including those for monetary
relations, energy, foreign investment, aid to developing countries, and
other issues – that together constitute a complex and interlinked pattern
of relations among the advanced market-economy countries. These, in
turn, are related to military-security relations among the major states.19
Within this multilayered system, a major function of international
regimes is to facilitate the making of specific agreements on matters of
substantive significance within the issue-area covered by the regime.
International regimes help to make governments’ expectations consistent
with one another. Regimes are developed in part because actors in world
politics believe that with such arrangements they will be able to make
mutually beneficial agreements that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to attain. In other words, regimes are valuable to governments
where, in their absence, certain mutually beneficial agreements would be
impossible to consummate. In such situations, ad hoc joint action would
be inferior to results of negotiation within a regime context.
Yet this characterization of regimes immediately suggests an explanatory puzzle. Why should it be worthwhile to construct regimes (themselves requiring agreement) in order to make specific agreements within
the regime frameworks? Why is it not more efficient simply to avoid the
regime stage and make the agreements on an ad hoc basis? In short, why
is there any demand for international regimes apart from a demand for
international agreements on particular questions?
An answer to this question is suggested by theories of ‘‘market failure’’ in economics. Market failure refers to situations in which the outcomes of market-mediated interaction are suboptimal (given the utility
functions of actors and the resources at their disposal). Agreements that

19

Vinod Aggarwal has developed the concept of ‘‘nesting’’ in his work on international
regimes in textiles since World War II. I am indebted to him for this idea, which has been
elaborated in his ‘‘Hanging by a Thread: International Regime Change in the Textile/
Apparel System, 1950–1979,’’ Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 1981.

The Demand for International Regimes

27

would be beneficial to all parties are not made. In situations of market
failure, economic activities uncoordinated by hierarchical authority
lead to inefficient results, rather than to the efficient outcomes expected
under conditions of perfect competition. In the theory of market failure, the problems are attributed not to inadequacies of the actors themselves (who are presumed to be rational utility-maximizers) but rather to
the structure of the system and the institutions, or lack thereof, that
characterize it.20 Specific attributes of the system impose transactions
costs (including information costs) that create barriers to effective cooperation among the actors. Thus institutional defects are responsible
for failures of coordination. To correct these defects, conscious institutional innovation may be necessary, although a good economist will
always compare the costs of institutional innovation with the costs of
market failure before recommending tampering with the market.
Like imperfect markets, world politics is characterized by institutional deficiencies that inhibit mutually advantageous coordination. Some
of the deficiencies revolve around problems of transactions costs and uncertainty that have been cogently analyzed by students of market failure.
Theories of market failure specify types of institutional imperfections
that may inhibit agreement; international regimes may be interpreted as
helping to correct similar institutional defects in world politics. Insofar
as regimes are established through voluntary agreement among a number of states, we can interpret them, at least in part, as devices to overcome the barriers to more efficient coordination identified by theories of
market failure.21

20

21

Of particular value for understanding market failure is Kenneth J. Arrow, Essays in the
Theory of Risk-Bearing (New York: North Holland/American Elsevier, 1974).
Helen Milner suggested to me that international regimes were in this respect like credit
markets, and that the history of the development of credit markets could be informative
for students of international regimes. The analogy seems to hold. Richard Ehrenberg
reports that the development of credit arrangements in medieval European Bourses
reduced transaction costs (since money did not need to be transported in the form of
specie) and provided high-quality information in the form of merchants’ newsletters and
exchanges of information at fairs: ‘‘during the Middle Ages the best information as to the
course of events in the world was regularly to be obtained in the fairs and the Bourses’’
(p. 317). The Bourses also provided credit ratings, which provided information but
also served as a crude substitute for effective systems of legal liability. Although the
descriptions of credit market development in works such as that by Ehrenberg are
fascinating, I have not been able to find a historically-grounded theory of these events. See
Richard Ehrenberg, Capital and Finance in the Age of the Renaissance: A Study of the
Fuggers and Their Connections, translated from the German by H. M. Lucas (New York:
Harcourt, Brace, no date), especially chap. 3 (pp. 307–333).

28

International Law and International Relations

The analysis that follows is based on two theoretical assumptions.
First, the actors whose behavior we analyze act, in general, as rational
utility-maximizers in that they display consistent tendencies to adjust to
external changes in ways that are calculated to increase the expected
value of outcomes to them. Second, the international regimes with
which we are concerned are devices to facilitate the making of agreements
among these actors. From these assumptions it follows that the demand
for international regimes at any given price will vary directly with the
desirability of agreements to states and with the ability of international
regimes actually to facilitate the making of such agreements. The condition for the theory’s operation (that is, for regimes to be formed) is that
sufficient complementary or common interests exist so that agreements
benefiting all essential regime members can be made.
The value of theories of market failure for this analysis rests on the
fact that they allow us to identify more precisely barriers to agreements.
They therefore suggest insights into how international regimes help to
reduce those barriers, and they provide richer interpretations of previously observed, but unexplained, phenomena associated with international regimes and international policy coordination. In addition,
concepts of market failure help to explain the strength and extent of international regimes by identifying characteristics of international systems,
or of international regimes themselves, that affect the demand for such
regimes and therefore, given a supply schedule, their quantity. Insights
from the market-failure literature therefore take us beyond the trivial costbenefit or supply-demand propositions with which we began, to hypotheses about relationships that are less familiar.
The emphasis on efficiency in the market-failure literature is consistent
with our constraint-choice analysis of the decision-making processes
leading to the formation and maintenance of international regimes. Each
actor must be as well or better off with the regime than without it – given
the prior structure of constraints. This does not imply, of course, that the
whole process leading to the formation of a new international regime will
yield overall welfare benefits. Outsiders may suffer; indeed, some international regimes (such as alliances or cartel-type regimes) are specifically designed to impose costs on them. These costs to outsiders may well outweigh
the benefits to members. In addition, powerful actors may manipulate
constraints prior to the formation of a new regime. In that case, although
the regime per se may achieve overall welfare improvements compared to
the immediately preceding situation, the results of the joint process may
be inferior to those that existed before the constraints were imposed.

The Demand for International Regimes

29

3. elements of a theory of the demand
for international regimes
We are now in a position to address our central puzzle – why is there any
demand for international regimes? – and to outline a theory to explain
why this demand exists. First, it is necessary to use our distinction between ‘‘agreements’’ and ‘‘regimes’’ to pose the issue precisely: given a
certain level of demand for international agreements, what will affect
the demand for international regimes? The Coase theorem, from the
market-failure literature, will then be used to develop a list of conditions
under which international regimes are of potential value for facilitating
agreements in world politics. This typological analysis turns our attention toward two central problems, transactions cost and informational
imperfections. Questions of information, involving uncertainty and
risk, will receive particular attention, since their exploration has rich implications for interpretation and future research.

The Demand for Agreements and the Demand for Regimes
It is crucial to distinguish clearly between international regimes, on
the one hand, and mere ad hoc substantive agreements, on the other.
Regimes, as argued above, facilitate the making of substantive agreements by providing a framework of rules, norms, principles, and procedures for negotiation. A theory of international regimes must explain
why these intermediate arrangements are necessary.
In our analysis, the demand for agreements will be regarded as exogenous. It may be influenced by many factors, particularly by the perceptions that leaders of governments have about their interests in agreement
or nonagreement. These perceptions will, in turn, be influenced by domestic politics, ideology, and other factors not encompassed by a systemic, constraint-choice approach. In the United States, ‘‘internationalists’’
have been attracted to international agreements and international organizations as useful devices for implementing American foreign policy;
‘‘isolationists’’ and ‘‘nationalists’’ have not. Clearly, such differences cannot be accounted for by our theory. We therefore assume a given desire
for agreements and ask: under these conditions, what will be the demand
for international regimes?
Under certain circumstances defining the demand and supply of agreements, there will be no need for regimes and we should expect none to
form. This will be the situation in two extreme cases, where demand for

30

International Law and International Relations

agreements is nil and where the supply of agreements is infinitely elastic
and free (so that all conceivable agreements can be made costlessly). But
where the demand for agreements is positive at some level of feasible cost,
and the supply of agreements is not infinitely elastic and free, there may be
a demand for international regimes if they actually make possible agreements yielding net benefits that would not be possible on an ad hoc basis.
In such a situation regimes can be regarded as ‘‘efficient.’’ We can now
ask: under what specific conditions will international regimes be efficient?
One way to address this question is to pose its converse. To ask about
the conditions under which international regimes will be worthless enables us to draw on work in social choice, particularly by Ronald Coase.
Coase was able to show that the presence of externalities alone does not
necessarily prevent Pareto-optimal coordination among independent
actors: under certain conditions, bargaining among these actors could
lead to Pareto-optimal solutions. The key conditions isolated by Coase
were (a) a legal framework establishing liability for actions, presumably
supported by governmental authority; (b) perfect information; and (c)
zero transactions costs (including organization costs and costs of making side-payments).22 If all these conditions were met in world politics,
ad hoc agreements would be costless and regimes unnecessary. At least
one of them must not be fulfilled if international regimes are to be of
value, as facilitators of agreement, to independent utility-maximizing
actors in world politics. Inverting the Coase theorem provides us, therefore, with a list of conditions, at least one of which must apply if regimes
are to be of value in facilitating agreements among governments:23
(a) lack of a clear legal framework establishing liability for actions;
22

23

Ronald Coase, ‘‘The Problem of Social Cost,’’ Journal of Law and Economics 3 (October
1960). For a discussion, see James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of
Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1962), p. 186.
If we were to drop the assumption that actors are strictly self-interested utilitymaximizers, regimes could be important in another way: they would help to develop
noms that are internalized by actors as part of their own utility functions. This is
important in real-world political-economic systems, as works by Schumpeter, Polanyi,
and Hirsch on the moral underpinnings of a market system indicate. It is likely to be
important in many international systems as well. But it is outside the scope of the
analytical approach taken in this article – which is designed to illuminate some issues, but
not to provide a comprehensive account of international regime change. See Joseph
Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (New York: Harper & Row, 1942),
especially Part II, ‘‘Can Capitalism Survive?’’; Kari Polanyi, The Great Transformation:
The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time (1944; Boston: Beacon Press, 1957);
and Fred Hirsch, Social Limits to Growth (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976).

The Demand for International Regimes

31

(b) information imperfections (information is costly);
(c) positive transactions costs.24
In world politics, of course, all of these conditions are met all of the
time: world government does not exist; information is extremely costly
and often impossible to obtain; transactions costs, including costs of organization and side-payments, are often very high. Yet the Coase theorem
is useful not merely as a way of categorizing these familiar problems, but
because it suggests how international regimes can improve actors’ abilities to make mutually beneficial agreements. Regimes can make agreement easier if they provide frameworks for establishing legal liability
(even if these are not perfect); improve the quantity and quality of information available to actors; or reduce other transactions costs, such as
costs of organization or of making side-payments. This typology allows
us to specify regime functions – as devices to make agreements possible –
more precisely, and therefore to understand demand for international
regimes. Insofar as international regimes can correct institutional defects
in world politics along any of these three dimensions (liability, information, transactions costs), they may become efficient devices for the
achievement of state purposes.
Regimes do not establish binding and enforceable legal liabilities in
any strict or ultimately reliable sense, although the lack of a hierarchical structure does not prevent the development of bits and pieces of
law.25 Regimes are much more important in providing established negotiating frameworks (reducing transactions costs) and in helping to
coordinate actor expectations (improving the quality and quantity of
information available to states). An explanation of these two functions
of international regimes, with the help of microeconomic analysis, will
lead to hypotheses about how the demand for international regimes should be expected to vary with changes in the nature of the
international system (in the case of transactions costs) and about effects of characteristics of the international regime itself (in the case of
information).

24

25

Information costs could be considered under the category of transaction costs, but
they are so important that I categorize them separately in order to give them special
attention.
For a discussion of ‘‘the varieties of international law,’’ see Louis Henkin, How Nations
Behave: Law and Foreign Policy, 2d ed. (New York: Columbia University Press for the
Council on Foreign Relations, 1979), pp. 13–22.

32

International Law and International Relations
International Regimes and Transactions Costs

Neither international agreements nor international regimes are created
spontaneously. Political entrepreneurs must exist who see a potential
profit in organizing collaboration. For entrepreneurship to develop, not
only must there be a potential social gain to be derived from the formation of an international arrangement, but the entrepreneur (usually, in
world politics, a government) must expect to be able to gain more itself
from the regime than it invests in organizing the activity. Thus organizational costs to the entrepreneur must be lower than the net discounted
value of the benefits that the entrepreneur expects to capture for itself.26
As a result, international cooperation that would have a positive social
payoff may not be initiated unless a potential entrepreneur would profit
sufficiently. This leads us back into questions of supply and the theory
of hegemonic stability, since such a situation is most likely to exist
where no potential entrepreneur is large relative to the whole set of
potential beneficiaries, and where ‘‘free riders’’ cannot be prevented
from benefiting from cooperation without paying proportionately.
Our attention here, however, is on the demand side: we focus on
the efficiency of constructing international regimes, as opposed simply
to making ad hoc agreements. We only expect regimes to develop
where the costs of making ad hoc agreements on particular substantive
matters are higher than the sum of the costs of making such agreements within a regime framework and the costs of establishing that
framework.
With respect to transactions costs, where do we expect these conditions
to be met? To answer this question, it is useful to introduce the concept of
issue density to refer to the number and importance of issues arising
within a given policy space. The denser the policy space, the more highly
interdependent are the different issues, and therefore the agreements
made about them. Where issue density is low, ad hoc agreements are quite
likely to be adequate: different agreements will not impinge on one
another significantly, and there will be few economies of scale associated
with establishing international regimes (each of which would encompass
only one or a few agreements). Where issue density is high, on the other
hand, one substantive objective may well impinge on another and regimes will achieve economies of scale, for instance in establishing

26

Davis and North, Institutional Change and American Economic Growth, especially
pp. 51–57.

The Demand for International Regimes

33

negotiating procedures that are applicable to a variety of potential agreements within similar substantive areas of activity.27
Furthermore, in dense policy spaces, complex linkages will develop
among substantive issues. Reducing industrial tariffs without damaging
one’s own economy may depend on agricultural tariff reductions from
others; obtaining passage through straits for one’s own warships may
depend on wider decisions taken about territorial waters; the sale of food
to one country may be more or less advantageous depending on other
food-supply contracts being made at the same time. As linkages such as
these develop, the organizational costs involved in reconciling distinct
objectives will rise and demands for overall frameworks of rules, norms,
principles, and procedures to cover certain clusters of issues – that is, for
international regimes – will increase.
International regimes therefore seem often to facilitate side-payments
among actors within issue-areas covered by comprehensive regimes,
since they bring together negotiators to consider a whole complex of issues. Side-payments in general are difficult in world politics and raise
serious issues of transaction costs: in the absence of a price system for
the exchange of favors, these institutional imperfections will hinder cooperation.28 International regimes may provide a partial corrective.29
The well-known literature on ‘‘spillover’’ in bargaining, relating to the
European Community and other integration schemes, can also be interpreted as being concerned with side-payments. In this literature,
27

28

29

The concept of issue density bears some relationship to Herbert Simon’s notion of
‘‘decomposability,’’ in The Sciences of the Artificial (Cambridge: MlT Press, 1969). In
both cases, problems that can be conceived of as separate are closely linked to one
another functionally, so that it is difficult to affect one without also affecting others.
Issue density is difficult to operationalize, since the universe (the ‘‘issue-area’’ or ‘‘policy
space’’) whose area forms the denominator of the term cannot easily be specified
precisely. But given a certain definition of the issue-area, it is possible to trace the
increasing density of issues within it over time. See, for example, Robert O. Keohane
and Joseph S. Nye, Power and Interdependence: World Politics in Transition (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1977), chap. 4.
On questions of linkage, see Arthur A. Stein, ‘‘The Politics of Linkage,’’ World Politics
33, 1 (October 1980): 62–81; Kenneth Oye, ‘‘The Domain of Choice,’’ in Oye et al., Eagle
Entangled: U.S. Foreign Policy in a Complex World (New York: Longmans, 1979),
pp. 3–33; and Robert D. Tollison and Thomas D. Willett, ‘‘An Economic Theory of
Mutually Advantageous Issue Linkage in International Negotiations,’’ International
Organization 33, 4 (Autumn 1979).
GATT negotiations and deliberations on the international monetary system have been
characterized by extensive bargaining over side-payments and complex politics of issuelinkage. For a discussion see Nicholas Hutton, ‘‘The Salience of Linkage in International
Economic Negotiations,’’ Journal of Common Market Studies 13, 1–2 (1975): 136–60.

34

International Law and International Relations

expectations that an integration arrangement can be expanded to new
issue-areas permit the broadening of potential side-payments, thus
facilitating agreement.30
It should be noted, however, that regimes may make it more difficult to
link issues that are clustered separately. Governments tend to organize
themselves consistently with how issues are treated internationally, as
well as vice versa; issues considered by different regimes are often dealt
with by different bureaucracies at home. Linkages and side-payments
become difficult under these conditions, since they always involve losses
as well as gains. Organizational subunits that would lose, on issues that
matter to them, from a proposed side-payment are unlikely to support
it on the basis of another agency’s claim that it is in the national interest. Insofar as the dividing lines between international regimes place
related issues in different jurisdictions, they may well make side-payments
and linkages between these issues less feasible.
The crucial point about regimes to be derived from this discussion of
transactions costs can be stated succinctly: the optimal size of a regime
will increase if there are increasing rather than diminishing returns to
regime-scale (reflecting the high costs of making separate agreements in
a dense policy space), or if the marginal costs of organization decline as
regime size grows. The point about increasing returns suggests an analogy with the theory of imperfect competition among firms. As Samuelson
notes, ‘‘increasing returns is the prime case of deviations from perfect
competition.’’31 In world politics, increasing returns to scale lead to
more extensive international regimes.
The research hypothesis to be derived from this analysis is that increased issue density will lead to greater demand for international regimes and to more extensive regimes. Since greater issue density is likely
to be a feature of situations of high interdependence, this forges a link
between interdependence and international regimes: increases in the former can be expected to lead to increases in demand for the latter.32
* * *
30
31

32

Ernst B. Haas, The Uniting of Europe (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1958).
Paul A. Samuelson, ‘‘The Monopolistic Competition Revolution,’’ in R. E. Kuenne, ed.,
Monopolistic Competition Theory (New York: Wiley, 1967), p. 117.
Increases in issue density could make it more difficult to supply regimes; the costs of
providing regimes could grow, for instance, as a result of multiple linkages across issues.
The 1970s Law of the Sea negotiations illustrate this problem. As a result, it will not
necessarily be the case that increases in interdependence will lead to increases in the
number, extensiveness, and strength of international regimes.

The Demand for International Regimes

35

The Demand for Specific Information
The problems of organization costs discussed earlier arise even in situations
where actors have entirely consistent interests (pure coordination games
with stable equilibria). In such situations, however, severe information
problems are not embedded in the structure of relationships, since actors
have incentives to reveal information and their own preferences fully to
one another. In these games the problem is to reach some agreement
point; but it may not matter much which of several is chosen.33 Conventions are important and ingenuity may be required, but serious systemic impediments to the acquisition and exchange of information are lacking.34
The norm of generalized commitment can be seen as a device for coping with the conflictual implications of uncertainty by imposing favorable
assumptions about others’ future behavior. The norm of generalized
commitment requires that one accept the veil of ignorance but act as if
one will benefit from others’ behavior in the future if one behaves now in
a regime-supporting way. Thus it creates a coordination game by ruling
out potentially antagonistic calculations.
Yet in many situations in world politics, specific and calculable conflicts of interest exist among the actors. In such situations, they all have
an interest in agreement (the situation is not zero-sum), but they prefer
different types of agreement or different patterns of behavior (e.g., one
may prefer to cheat without the other being allowed to do so). As Stein
points out in this volume, these situations are characterized typically by
unstable equilibria. Without enforcement, actors have incentives to deviate from the agreement point:
[Each] actor requires assurances that the other will also eschew its rational choice
[and will not cheat, and] such collaboration requires a degree of formalization.
The regime must specify what constitutes cooperation and what constitutes
cheating.35

In such situations of strategic interaction, as in oligopolistic competition and world politics, systemic constraint-choice theory yields no
33

34

35

The classic discussion is in Thomas C. Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict (1960;
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980), chap. 4, ‘‘Toward a Theory of Interdependent Decision.’’ See also Schelling, Micromotives and Macrobehavior (New York:
Norton, 1978).
For an interesting discussion of regimes in these terms, see the paper in this volume by
Oran R. Young. On conventions, see David K. Lewis, Convention: A Philosophical Study
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969).
Arthur A. Stein, article in this volume, p. 312.

36

International Law and International Relations

determinate results or stable equilibria. Indeed, discussions of ‘‘blackmailing’’ or games such as ‘‘prisoners’ dilemma’’ indicate that, under
certain conditions, suboptimal equilibria are quite likely to appear. Game
theory, as Simon has commented, only illustrates the severity of the
problem; it does not solve it.36
Under these circumstances, power factors are important. They are
particularly relevant to the supply of international regimes: regimes
involving enforcement can only be supplied if there is authority backed
by coercive resources. As we have seen, regimes themselves do not possess
such resources. For the means necessary to uphold sanctions, one has to
look to the states belonging to the regime.
Yet even under conditions of strategic interaction and unstable equilibria, regimes may be of value to actors by providing information. Since
high-quality information reduces uncertainty, we can expect that there
will be a demand for international regimes that provide such information.
Firms that consider relying on the behavior of other firms within a
context of strategic interaction – for instance, in oligopolistic competition –
face similar information problems. They also do not understand reality
fully. Students of market failure have pointed out that risk-averse firms
will make fewer and less far-reaching agreements than they would
under conditions of perfect information. Indeed, they will eschew agreements that would produce mutual benefits. Three specific problems facing
firms in such a context are also serious for governments in world politics
and give rise to demands for international regimes to ameliorate them.
(1) Asymmetric information. Some actors may have more information
about a situation than others. Expecting that the resulting bargains would
be unfair, ‘‘outsiders’’ may therefore be reluctant to make agreements with
‘‘insiders.’’37 One aspect of this in the microeconomic literature is ‘‘quality
uncertainty,’’ in which a buyer is uncertain about the real value of goods
being offered. In such a situation (typified by the market for used cars
when sellers are seen as unscrupulous), no exchange may take place despite
the fact that with perfect information, there would be extensive trading.38
36

37

38

Herbert Simon, ‘‘From Substantive to Procedural Rationality,’’ in Latsis, ed., Method and
Appraisal in Economics; Spiro J. Latsis, ‘‘A Research Programme in Economics,’’ in ibid.;
and on blackmailing, Oye, ‘‘The Domain of Choice.’’
Oliver E. Williamson, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Anti-Trust Implications
(New York: Free Press, 1975).
George A. Ackerlof, ‘‘The Market for ‘Lemons’: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 3 (August 1970).

The Demand for International Regimes

37

(2) Moral hazard. Agreements may alter incentives in such a way as to
encourage less cooperative behavior. Insurance companies face this problem of ‘‘moral hazard.’’ Property insurance, for instance, may make people
less careful with their property and therefore increase the risk of loss.39
(3) Deception and irresponsibility. Some actors may be dishonest, and
enter into agreements that they have no intention of fulfilling. Others may
be ‘‘irresponsible,’’ and make commitments that they are unlikely to be
able to carry out. Governments or firms may enter into agreements that
they intend to keep, assuming that the environment will continue to be
benign; if adversity sets in, they may be unable to keep their commitments. Banks regularly face this problem, leading them to devise standards of ‘‘creditworthiness.’’ Large governments trying to gain adherents
to international agreements may face similar difficulties: countries that
are enthusiastic about cooperation are likely to be those that expect to
gain more, proportionately, than they contribute. This is analogous to
problems of self-selection in the market-failure literature. For instance, if
rates are not properly adjusted, people with high risks of heart attack
will seek life insurance more avidly than those with longer life expectancies; people who purchased ‘‘lemons’’ will tend to sell them earlier on
the used-car market than people with ‘‘creampuffs.’’40 In international
politics, self-selection means that for certain types of activities – for example, sharing research and development information – weak states (with
much to gain but little to give) may have greater incentives to participate than strong ones. But without the strong states, the enterprise as a
whole will fail. From the perspective of the outside observer, irresponsibility is an aspect of the problem of public goods and free-riding;41 but
from the standpoint of the actor trying to determine whether to rely on a
potentially irresponsible partner, it is a problem of uncertainty and risk.
Either way, information costs may prevent mutually beneficial agreement, and the presence of these costs will provide incentives to states to
demand international regimes (either new regimes or the maintenance
of existing ones) that will ameliorate problems of uncertainty and risk.
* * *
39
40
41

Arrow, Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing.
Ackerlof, ‘‘The Market for ‘Lemons’ ’’; Arrow, Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing.
For an analysis along these lines, see Davis B. Bobrow and Robert T. Kudrle, ‘‘Energy
R&D: In Tepid Pursuit of Collective Goods,’’ International Organization 33, 2
(Spring 1979): 149–76.

38

International Law and International Relations

4. conclusions
The argument of this paper can be summarized under [five] headings.
First, international regimes can be interpreted, in part, as devices to
facilitate the making of substantive agreements in world politics, particularly among states. Regimes facilitate agreements by providing rules,
norms, principles, and procedures that help actors to overcome barriers
to agreement identified by economic theories of market failure. That is,
regimes make it easier for actors to realize their interests collectively.
Second, public goods problems affect the supply of international regimes, as the ‘‘theory of hegemonic stability’’ suggests. But they also
give rise to demand for international regimes, which can ameliorate problems of transactions costs and information imperfections that hinder effective decentralized responses to problems of providing public goods.
Third, two major research hypotheses are suggested by the demand-side
analysis of this article.
(a) Increased issue density will lead to increased demand for international regimes.
(b) The demand for international regimes will be in part a function of
the effectiveness of the regimes themselves in developing norms of
generalized commitment and in providing high-quality information
to policymakers.
Fourth, our analysis helps us to interpret certain otherwise puzzling
phenomena, since our constraint-choice approach allows us to see how
demands for such behavior would be generated. We can better understand
transgovernmental relations, as well as the lags observed between structural change and regime change in general, and between the decline of the
United States’ hegemony and regime disruption in particular.
Fifth, in the light of our analysis, several assertions of structural theories appear problematic. In particular, it is less clear that hegemony is
a necessary condition for stable international regimes under all circumstances. Past patterns of institutionalized cooperation may be able to compensate, to some extent, for increasing fragmentation of power.
* * *
None of these observations implies an underlying harmony of interests in world politics. Regimes can be used to pursue particularistic
and parochial interests, as well as more widely shared objectives. They
do not necessarily increase overall levels of welfare. Even when they

The Demand for International Regimes

39

do, conflicts among units will continue. States will attempt to force the
burdens of adapting to change onto one another. Nevertheless, as long
as the situations involved are not constant-sum, actors will have incentives to coordinate their behavior, implicitly or explicitly, in order to
achieve greater collective benefits without reducing the utility of any unit.
When such incentives exist, and when sufficient interdependence exists
that ad hoc agreements are insufficient, opportunities will arise for the
development of international regimes. If international regimes did not
exist, they would surely have to be invented.

part ii
COMMITMENT AND COMPLIANCE

3
Democratic States and Commitment in
International Relations
Kurt Taylor Gaubatz

[T]he Four Hundred . . . departed widely from the democratic system
of government. . . . They also sent to Agis, the Lacedaemonian king, at
Decelea, to say that they desired to make peace, and that he might
reasonably be more disposed to treat now that he had them to deal with
instead of the inconstant commons.
—Thucydides
Confederations are dissolved for the sake of some advantage, and in this
republics abide by their agreements far better than do princes. Instances
might be cited of treaties broken by princes for a very small advantage, and
of treaties which have not been broken by a republic for a very great
advantage.
—Machiavelli

The traditional view of popular government as shifting and unreliable,
which Thucydides attributes to the Athenian oligarchs, has a long and
distinguished history. Machiavelli, who takes issue with this view,
I have benefited greatly in this project from the comments of the participants in the Social
Science Research Council workshop on Liberalization and Foreign Policy and from the
comments of three anonymous reviewers. John Ferejohn, Jeffry Frieden, Joanne Gowa,
Miles Kahler, Lisa Martin, and Barry Weingast have been particularly helpful. I am indebted to Kenneth Schultz and Marissa Myers for their able research assistance. Funding was generously provided by the Center for International Security and Arms Control
and by the Institute for International Studies, both at Stanford University. Doug Rivers
was of considerable help in thinking about the statistical dimensions of this article. For
much of the data used in this project, I am grateful to the Correlates of War Project and
the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. *** The epigraphs are
from Thucydides [400 B.C.] 1951, 2.25.70; and Machiavelli [1530] 1970, 1.59.

43

44

International Law and International Relations

attributes it to ‘‘all writers’’ and ‘‘all historians.’’1 The significant, if still
somewhat tenuous worldwide trend toward democratization of the past
decade has renewed interest in the implications of democratic governance
for the international behavior of states.2 Most of that interest has focused
on the relationship between democracy and conflict. *** I return here to
the basic question suggested by Thucydides and Machiavelli, which asks
about the ability of democratic states to make commitments in their
international relations. I argue that there is both a theoretical and an
empirical basis for rejecting the traditional view of ‘‘the inconstant
commons.’’
The ability of states to make commitments is a critical dimension of
the international system. Between two states, commitments run the gamut
from formal defense treaties to casual assurances between diplomats. For
liberal institutionalists, the ability to make commitments is central to the
process of international institutionalization.3 But commitments do not
have to reflect only cooperative behavior. Even for realists, the ability to
make commitments is critical to international interactions. The efficacy
of deterrence threats and the functioning of alliance politics clearly hinge
on the ability of actors to make credible commitments.4
The dominant assumption in the study of international relations has
been that the ability, or the lack of ability, to make commitments is a
function of the anarchic international system.5 *** Given the importance
of commitment and the traditional concern about the inconstancy of
popular rule, the possibility that liberal and democratic domestic political
and economic arrangements may have distinct effects on the ability of
states to make credible international commitments would seem well
worth investigating.
On the face of it, the challenge of signaling and maintaining commitment in political systems that require public deliberation and approval for
major international actions would seem formidable. But the relationship
between international commitments and domestic politics is more complex than might be assumed from a narrow focus on the idea of the inconstant commons. In this article I set out a working definition of liberal
democracy and draw out of that definition several implications for the

1
2
3
4
5

Machiavelli [1530] 1970, 1.58.
Huntington 1991.
Keohane 1984.
Schelling 1960; 1966.
Grieco 1988.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 45
ability of states to make international commitments. As against the
common perspective of democratic inconstancy, I argue that there are
both normative and structural characteristics of liberal democratic states
that can significantly enhance the strength of their international commitments. I then turn to a consideration of democratic alliance behavior
as a preliminary empirical indicator for the distinctive nature of democratic commitments in the international system. In particular, I bring
forward strong empirical evidence to show that alliances between liberal democratic states have proved more durable than either alliances
between nondemocratic states or alliances between democratic and nondemocratic states.
Democracy and commitment both are complex phenomena. Many
books have been written on both subjects. For the purpose of this analysis, I offer working definitions that, while inadequate as complete philosophical statements, can serve as the basis for a discussion of these
phenomena within the context of international affairs.
A state makes a commitment to a course of action when it creates
a subjective belief on the part of others that it will carry through with
a certain course of action. Commitments may be trivial and involve doing
things that are clearly in one’s interest to do. The more interesting commitments are those that bind the state to take some set of actions that do
not look to be in its narrow self-interest as an international actor. Thus,
the commitment problem for the United States when it used nuclear
deterrence to defend Europe against a Soviet attack was how to convince
both the Europeans and the Soviets that in the event of a war, American
leaders would be prepared to sacrifice New York in order to save Berlin
or Paris.6 In this article I will deal in particular with alliance commitments. Alliances, at their core, are a reaction to the problem of nontrivial commitment.7 If the narrow self-interest of one alliance partner would
be served by defending the other, the two would not need to formalize
their commitment on paper, beyond some minimal efforts to coordinate
defense policies and practices. The creation of a formal alliance is an
attempt to signal to both the alliance partners and other states that a
genuine commitment to some level of mutual defense exists.
The definition of democracy is even more problematic. I focus in this
article on the notion of ‘‘liberal democracy.’’ Scholars, of course, continue
to debate the relationship between these two terms, but my argument
6
7

Schelling 1966, chap. 3.
Kegley and Raymond 1990.

46

International Law and International Relations

proceeds analytically from both concepts. Liberalism refers to a conception of the state that faces juridical limits on its powers and functions.8
Democracy refers to a form of government in which power rests with the
majority. Democracy requires governments to be able to garner majority
approval of their performance in order to stay in power. At the same time,
liberalism will require that minority opinions can be expressed and that
rivals for power will be able to exercise their rights to try to form alternative majorities. The demands that power be limited and that it rest
with the majority can be in tension.9 In the modern world, however, liberalism and democracy have become strongly, though not perfectly interconnected. Indeed, a number of scholars argue that modern democracy
in its juridical or institutional sense is a natural extension of liberalism.10
For the purposes of this analysis, then, liberal democracies comprise
states that are limited in their conduct of international affairs by constitutionally defined institutions of popular will and of juridical constraint.
At the domestic level, the survival of liberal democracy and the ability
of governments to make credible commitments are inherently intertwined.
The existence of liberal democracy ultimately rests on the ability of the
majority to convince minorities that it will not remake institutions when
its narrow self-interests might be better served by abandoning the notion
of limited government. A central question of liberal democratic theory,
then, is how it is that the majority commits to accept limits on its power.11
Similarly, scholars have long debated the implications of limited government and majority rule for external commitments. Before moving to
the analytic portion of this inquiry, it is worth a brief detour to summarize some of these perspectives about the ability of liberal democratic
states to make commitments in their international relations.

three perspectives on democratic commitments
The traditional views on the ability of democratic states to make international commitments can be grouped into three perspectives. The first
perspective emerges from the dictate of structural realism that internal
organization will be irrelevant to the external behavior of states.12 In this
view, the ability of states to make commitments will be based on the
8
9
10
11
12

See Manning 1976, 15; and Bobbio 1990, 1.
Bobbio 1990, 2.
Ibid., 31. See also Rawls 1993.
For some recent treatments of this vexing issue, see Hochschild 1981 and Riker 1982.
On some of the limitations of the realist approach in this area, see Barnett and Levy 1991.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 47
demands of the distribution of power in the anarchic international system. There is little room, then, for different behaviors to arise systematically from variations in domestic regimes. In the words of Kenneth
Waltz: ‘‘International politics consists of like units duplicating one
another’s activities.’’13 All states will have trouble making commitments
because the system is anarchic, and the incentives for keeping or breaking
commitments will be no different for democratic or nondemocratic regimes. To date, the vast majority of the literature on the nature of commitments in international relations has treated regime type as irrelevant.
Those who have addressed domestic dynamics and the impact of regime type have tended to take a second perspective that views democratic states as distinctively less capable of making strong commitments.
As Machiavelli asserts, there is a long tradition of skepticism regarding
the efficacy of internal democracy for external relations in general and
in particular about the ability of democratic states to make external commitments. Democratic foreign policy, in this view, is dependent on the
vagaries and passions of public opinion. *** Alexis de Tocqueville’s
oft-quoted observation that ‘‘in the control of society’s foreign affairs
democratic governments do appear decidedly inferior to others’’ is
bolstered with his claim that a democratic government tends ‘‘to obey its
feelings rather than its calculations and to abandon a long-matured plan to
satisfy a momentary passion.’’14 Lord Salisbury, the nineteenth-century
British Prime Minister, points to the regular changes of leadership
demanded by democratic publics as a significant limitation on the ability
of any given leader to commit the state to a course of action: ‘‘for this
reason, if no other,’’ he argues, ‘‘Britain could not make military alliances
on the continental pattern.’’15
The third perspective sees democracies as well able to enter into longterm commitments. Some holding this view make a positive argument
about the characteristics of democracy that will enhance the strength of
international commitments, while others attribute the strength of democratic commitments to an inability to change course rapidly. Machiavelli
typifies the more negative view that the cumbersome machinery of democratic foreign policymaking will increase democratic reliability even
after objective interests have changed. Immanuel Kant exemplifies the
positive view, holding that states with ‘‘republican’’ forms of government
13
14
15

Waltz 1979, 97.
Tocqueville [1835] 1969, 2.5.13.
Lowe 1967, 10.

48

International Law and International Relations

will be united by bonds of trade and shared norms. In Kant’s regime of
‘‘asocial sociability,’’ the democratic norms of nonviolent problem solving will be operative between as well as within democratic states.16 It is
for this third perspective that I will argue here: distinctive institutions
and preferences should enhance the ability of democratic states to make
credible international commitments.

the theoretical bases for democratic distinctiveness
I make the argument for a distinctive democratic capability to make
lasting international commitments in three parts. First, I look at several
arguments about the basic stability of democratic foreign policy. I then
argue that there are particular and distinctive values and foreign policy
preferences in democratic states that can contribute to stable international commitments. Finally, I suggest that some characteristics of the
internal institutions of democratic states are critical in enhancing the
credibility of external commitments.
The Stability of Foreign Policy in Liberal Democratic States
The central argument of those who question the ability of democratic
states to make credible commitments in the international system focuses
on the putative instability of democratic policy choices. It is, therefore,
with those arguments that I will begin in setting out the case for strong
democratic commitments. *** I briefly assess foreign policy stability here
in terms of the stability of public preferences, the stability of democratic
leadership, and the stability of foreign policy institutions. In each case
I begin with a look at the traditional view of democratic instability and
then turn to a positive argument for the stability of the international
commitments of democratic states.
The Stability of Public Preferences
Gabriel Almond sets the tone for the view of fickle democratic foreign
policymaking in his classic analysis of the American public and foreign
policy: ‘‘An overtly interventionist and ‘responsible’ United States hides
a covertly isolationist longing, . . . an overtly tolerant America is at the
same time barely stifling intolerance reactions, . . . an idealistic America
is muttering soto voce cynicisms, . . . a surface optimism in America
16

Kant [1795] 1991. For a more recent proponent of this position, see Dixon 1994. See
also Maoz and Russett 1993.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 49
conceals a dread of the future.’’17 This image has been further bolstered
by the public opinion work that emphasizes the weakness of political
conceptions in the general public.18 If democratic publics are fickle, and
if democratic foreign policies are especially sensitive to public preferences, then we might expect democratic foreign policies to be highly
unpredictable.19
While the image of changeability is a strong one, it is not one we should
accept too hastily. The most significant of recent work in this area has
argued that democratic states actually are quite stable in their domestic
preference orderings.20 In assessing the stability of democratic policy, it
is well to remember Waltz’s warning that when evaluating the abilities
of democratic states in the foreign policy arena, it is important to consider
those abilities relative to the abilities of nondemocratic states.21 That
democratic states flip and flop between isolationism and interventionism
may be true, but this does not mean that other states have stable preferences simply because they are headed by a single despot.22 Machiavelli
makes such a comparative argument in rejecting the view of the masses as
fickle – a view that he ascribes to Titus Livy and ‘‘all other historians’’:
I claim, then, that for the failing for which writers blame the masses, any body of
men one cares to select may be blamed, and especially princes. . . . The nature of
the masses, then, is no more reprehensible than is the nature of princes, for all do
wrong and to the same extent when there is nothing to prevent them doing
wrong. Of this there are plenty of examples besides those given, both among the
Roman emperors and among other tyrants and princes; and in them we find
a degree of inconstancy and changeability in behaviour such as is never found in
the masses.23

In the more contemporary setting, we can consider the frequent
criticisms of the response of democratic states to the rise of Nazi Germany.
If analysts wish to draw strong lessons from the vacillation of the
democracies in the interwar years, then it is only fair to point to the
dramatic shifts in German–Soviet relations in that period as well.24
17
18
19

20
21
22

23
24

Almond 1950, 67.
Converse 1964.
On the fickleness of democratic publics and their influence on foreign policies, see
Monroe 1979; and Page and Shapiro 1983.
See Shapiro and Page 1988; and Russett 1990, 92–95.
Waltz 1967, 17.
For two different approaches to democracies’ tendency to waver between isolationism
and interventionism, see Hartz 1955; and Klingberg 1952.
Machiavelli [1530] 1970, 1.58.
On the behavior of democracies in the interwar years, see, for example, Taylor 1961, xi.

50

International Law and International Relations

The democratic states were uncertain about how to interpret their obligations to Czechoslovakia. They did, however, finally pursue their treaty
obligations with Poland in quite certain terms. Meanwhile, the Germans
and Soviets were experimenting with dramatic shifts in their positions
toward one another. Ultimately, of course, the Nazi–Soviet pact proved
worthless. The democratic states, on the other hand, maintained the basic
shape of their commitments to one another despite very high international and domestic costs.
Contrary to the pessimism of many analysts, foreign policy issues do
seem to have played an important role in American electoral politics.25
This role has not led to either the extremes of chaos or paralysis that the
critics of democratic foreign policy have predicted. The policy views of
the public in aggregate have been reasonably stable and well-connected to
the exigencies of external events.26 When we look at the issue of policy
stability from an empirical angle, the reality seems to be that democracies
can maintain stable equilibrium policies.27
* * *
The Stability of Democratic Leadership
A central fact of the constraints on government power in the modern
liberal democracies has been limitations on the tenure of government
leaders. *** Regular leadership change is an important element in
thinking about the relationship between democracy and commitment.
Henry Bienen and Nicholas Van de Walle have shown that the leaders of
democratic states do tend to have shorter tenures than the leaders of
nondemocratic states.28 Those who would enter into commitments with
democracies must face the possibility that a new leader will be less
inclined to honor previous commitments. The United States faces the
prospect of major leadership change every four years. In parliamentary
systems, the government could fall at any time. Some kinds of agreements
surely will survive across governments, but it is plausible that the myriad
small understandings that condition relations between states might be
threatened by a new administration. ***
The simple fact that leadership change is more frequent is not, however, necessarily a negative factor for commitment. Again, a comparative
25
26
27
28

Aldrich, Sullivan, and Borgida 1989.
See Page and Shapiro 1991; Holsti 1992; and Nincic 1992.
See Russett 1990; and Page and Shapiro 1991.
Bienen and Van de Walle 1991.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 51
perspective is important. Democratic leadership changes are regularized
as well as being regular. The ability of democratic states to make smooth
leadership transitions can help improve the stability of commitments.
Indeed, Riker argues that rapid elite circulation can itself stabilize
policies.29 Nondemocratic states that do not have effective means for
making leadership transitions may have fewer leadership changes, but
those changes may be accompanied by greater shifts in preferences and
policies. *** The transition from Presidents Carter to Reagan pales in
comparison to the change from the Shah of Iran to Ayatollah Khomeini,
from Mao Tse-tung to Deng Xiaoping, from Joseph Stalin to Nikita
Khrushchev, or from Leonid Brezhnev to Mikhail Gorbachev.
Finally, it is important to remember that the juridical nature of liberal
democracy gives current leaders the power to commit future leaders.
Political power in liberal democracies rests abstractly with the office and is
limited by juridical principles, rather than resting with specific individuals
or being unlimited. Thus, future leaders are bound by the domestic legal
environment to honor the treaty commitments of their predecessors. ***
The Stability of Democratic Institutions
While the political life of individual leaders may be relatively short and
unpredictable in liberal democracies, domestic political institutions themselves are considerably more stable. As I have argued above, liberal
democracy requires that majorities be able to commit to stable institutional arrangements that codify minority rights and constraints on majority powers. To the degree that democratic states possess institutional
stability despite regular and regularized leadership change, it should be
easier for them to enter into commitments. Stable civil service bureaucracies that handle foreign affairs, for example, help ensure some degree of
policy continuity. ***
The Distinctive Preferences of Liberal Democracies
*** In responding to the traditional critique of democratic foreign policymaking, we also need to look at the kinds of values democratic states
bring to bear in thinking about international commitments in general.
It is common for analysts of the liberal democratic states to focus on
their political culture. This line of argument sees something distinctive
about the ideas and values that are held by democratic publics. ***
29

Riker 1982.

52

International Law and International Relations

Tocqueville made a number of assertions about the distinctive preferences that would emerge in democratic political culture. *** He viewed
these preferences as largely inimical to effective foreign policy commitments and sustained international involvement in general.30 Isolationism
is a characteristic frequently attributed to democratic states. To the degree
that democratic states turn inward, they will pay less attention to their
international obligations and may thus prove less reliable. But this logic
is not definitive. At least two other possible connections between isolationism and international commitments are possible. First, following
Machiavelli’s argument, an isolationist turn may make states take less
account of the need to abandon a commitment that begins to conflict
with their interests.31 Second, the isolationist state may be inclined to
make only those commitments that involve truly vital national interests
and thus are more likely to be honored.32
The Role of Law in Liberal Democracy
Tocqueville also suggests that respect for law is a critical component of
democratic political culture.33 *** The internal practice of liberal
democracy requires a basic respect for legal commitments. More recently, some have argued that these internal norms are also reflected in
preferences over external policies.34 While the force of law in democratic
foreign policymaking is still being argued, international commitments
and domestic legal commitments do seem to be connected. For example,
international law has long been expressly incorporated into the domestic
legal order in the Anglo-American legal tradition and has spread to most
of the other major liberal democracies as well.35 In relations between
states, legalism and the reputation of a state for reliability do seem to have
at least significant rhetorical appeal in democratic polities. Whether the
respect for law emerges from practice, from ideology, or from some other
primitive of inclination, if democratic peoples hold legal norms to be of
some overarching legitimacy, then this will increase their sense of the
binding nature of international commitments.36
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Tocqueville [1835] 1969, 1.2.5.13.
Machiavelli [1530] 1970, 1.59.
I am indebted to an anonymous reviewer for this second point.
Tocqueville [1835] 1969, 1.2.6.4.
Doyle 1983, 230. See also Dixon 1994; and Maoz and Russett 1993.
von Glahn [1965] 1992, chap. 3.
For a discussion of the effect of transnational legal arrangements on liberal democracies,
see Burley 1993. On the relation between domestic dispute resolution procedures and
international relations, see Dixon 1993.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 53
Democratic Interdependence
Tocqueville identifies a third source of distinctive preferences in liberal
democratic states pointing to the effects of ‘‘interdependence.’’ *** Liberal economic orders that lead to increased trade and other associations
between their citizens will naturally make them more interdependent. This
logic follows closely Kant’s argument about the pacific union of democratic states, based on the free flow of people and goods.37 Tocqueville
suggests interdependence as a basis for the lack of war between democratic states: ‘‘As the spread of equality, taking place in several countries
at once, simultaneously draws the inhabitants into trade and industry,
not only do their tastes come to be alike, but their interests become so
mixed and entangled that no nation can inflict on others ills which will
not fall back on its own head. So that in the end all come to think of war
as a calamity almost as severe for the conqueror as for the conquered.’’38 *** A third-party attack on an ally might be almost as severe
a calamity for the interdependent ally as it is for the attacked state. Thus,
interdependence can increase the credibility of commitments between
states faced with an outside threat.
* * *
The Institutional Resources for Democratic Commitments
Liberal democracy makes it more likely that interdependent interest
groups will be able to push the larger society to take their interests into
consideration. The role of interest groups with vested interests in international commitments not only reflects on the distinctive preferences
of liberal states but also points to the role of their internal institutions
in strengthening commitments.
The Multiple Levels of Democratic Domestic Politics
The notion of liberal democracy as a system of majoritarian and juridical
limits on government action is suggestive of Robert Putnam’s recent
argument that two-level games are a useful analog for many aspects of
international politics.39 In his model, state leaders must negotiate in the
international arena and then return home to sell commitments in the
domestic arena. *** If foreign policy is dependent on public approval,
37

38
39

Kant [1794] 1991, 50. For a recent review of the notion of a cosmopolitan international
economic order see Neff 1990.
Toqueville [1835] 1969, 2.3.26.
Putnam 1988.

54

International Law and International Relations

and if public preferences are either distinct from leader preferences or are
constantly and dramatically changing, then the state will have difficulty
making the credible commitments it would otherwise choose. In this
regard, Putnam makes a particularly interesting distinction between voluntary and involuntary defection from cooperative schemes. As with
Woodrow Wilson and the League of Nations or Jimmy Carter and the
second strategic arms limitation talks treaty, democratic leaders can
enter into international agreements in good faith but then find themselves unable to implement the agreement because of democratic constraints on their power at home.
This, however, is not a sufficient consideration of the role of domestic
constraints. Walter Lippmann worried in The Public Philosophy that
democratic states would be frozen into undesirable policies by the inability to mobilize public support for change.40 This is also the basis of
Machiavelli’s assertion that democratic states are less likely to break
treaties, even when they have strong incentives to do so.41 By this logic,
the same factors that make it difficult for democratic states to enter into
commitments also make it harder to get out of them. ***
Domestic politics will be particularly effective at increasing the ability
of democratic leaders to make commitments that accord with the interests
of a strong domestic constituency. *** The United States can make
effective commitments to Israel even without a formal alliance because it
has a substantial domestic audience that will monitor and enforce that
commitment in the domestic arena. *** Germany’s somewhat reticent
acquiescence to the 1994 round of the Basel convention banning all
exports of hazardous wastes *** will be closely monitored not only by the
other parties but also by Germany’s own environmental activists. Thus,
the combination of interdependence and a strong voice for domestic
actors has the potential to increase significantly the ability of democratic
states to make commitments when the interests of other states are shared
by significant domestic groups.
The Transparency of Democratic Domestic Politics
The multiple levels of democratic policymaking take on particular
significance because democratic political systems are relatively transparent. Without the ability to observe what the government is doing and
the freedom to express and organize alternative political views, the
40
41

Lippmann 1955, 18–19.
Machiavelli [1530] 1970, 1.59.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 55
liberal notions of limited government and political competition would be
meaningless. It is very difficult, however, to discriminate against external
actors in providing transparency to internal actors. *** Any embassy can
subscribe to the major newspapers that provide day-to-day investigative
services on the policymaking activities of the democratic state. *** Outsiders can observe linkages between commitments made to them and
commitments made to the domestic audience. When a democratic leader
makes a public commitment to a specific course of action, deviation from
that course might bring domestic as well as international repercussions.
When President Bush vowed to remove Iraqi troops from Kuwait, the
Iraqis should have known that that vow would bear on the ensuing election
as well as on the international situation.
Recent work at the interstices of economics and political science has
shed new light on the relationship between social organization and the
ability of states to make commitments to domestic audiences. Two
particularly interesting examples of this literature are Douglas North
and Barry Weingast’s interpretation of the Glorious Revolution as an
exercise in recasting a constitution in order to increase the ability of the
state to make commitments and Franc¸ois Velde and Thomas Sargent’s
similar interpretation of the French Revolution.42 In these pieces, the
respective authors argue that democratic institutions can increase the
ability of the state to make commitments to large numbers of domestic
actors. *** In the international arena, the ability to link external
commitments transparently with internal commitments will allow democratic states to draw on domestic audiences to aid their international
credibility.
Thomas Schelling points to the importance of political costs for enhancing the credibility of international commitments.43 He focuses on
incurring political costs within the international system itself. But similar
benefits can be derived from incurring these costs at home if they can be
adequately observed from outside. The linkage between external commitments and internal political costs is represented formally in James
Fearon’s work on the role of audience costs in international interactions.44 When democratic leaders send signals in the international arena
that bear domestic costs at home, those signals will have more credibility
than would similar signals that bear no significant domestic costs. All
42
43
44

See North and Weingast 1989; and Velde and Sargent 1990, respectively.
Schelling 1966, 49.
Fearon 1990.

56

International Law and International Relations

states face some domestic costs for their international actions, but democratic states may be distinctive in the degree of domestic accountability. *** Statements and actions may create domestic expectations that
will lead to audience costs or electoral punishment if a leader fails to carry
out an international commitment.
Making credible international commitments is difficult at best for all
states. I have argued here that, contrary to the traditional image of
unreliability, democratic states should be relatively effective at making
international commitments. The task now is to turn to some empirical
attempts to assess the overall ability of democratic states to make commitments and to abide by them.

empirical soundings: democratic alliance behavior
Alliances are the most salient form of commitment behavior in the current
international system. States join formal alliances in order to indicate both
to their alliance partner and to other states that the level of commitment
between the two states is greater than the level of commitment that would
be expected based simply on observed international interests. *** If
democratic states are unreliable because of shifting majority preferences,
we would expect to see this reflected in the length of time that they are able
to maintain alliances.
* * *
The analysis of alliance commitments is also appropriate to the degree
that alliance commitments are an indicator of international community.
Drawing on Kant’s essay On Perpetual Peace, Michael Doyle’s explanation for the liberal peace turns on a natural community of liberal states:
Since morally autonomous citizens hold rights to liberty, the states that democratically represent them have the right to exercise political independence.
Mutual respect for these rights then becomes the touchstone of international liberal theory. When states respect each other’s rights, individuals are free to establish private international ties without state interference. Profitable exchanges
between merchants and educational exchanges among scholars then create a web
of mutual advantages and commitments that bolsters sentiments of public
respect. These conventions of mutual respect have formed a cooperative foundation for relations among liberal democracies of a remarkably effective kind.45

* * *

45

Doyle 1983, 213.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 57
Some empirical work on the question of democratic alliance behavior
has been done. Ole Holsti, Terrence Hopmann, and John Sullivan included a polity variable in their 1973 analysis of alliance politics.46
Their conclusions about democratic alliance behavior are mixed. In their
survey of all alliances between 1815 and 1939, they find that ideological
similarity disposes states to ally with each other and leads to some
increase in the length of alliances, although they conclude that after
alliances are formed, the impact of ideological differences is minimal.47
They also find some areas of democratic distinctiveness in their case
study work. For example, looking at the differences between Chinese
and French defection from their respective alliance systems in the 1950s,
they argue that in pluralistic polities, intra-alliance disputes tend to be
confined to a narrow range of issues, while in nonpluralistic polities,
intra-alliance disputes tend to spill over into all issue-areas.48 In an argument that echoes the Kantian hypothesis, the mechanism they posit for
this effect is basically the influence of complex interdependence, which
creates a large number of nongovernmental ties between pluralistic states.
Randolph Siverson and Juliann Emmons, in a recent analysis that focuses specifically on democratic states, confirm with more rigorous statistics the observation of Holsti, Hopmann, and Sullivan that ideologically
similar states are more likely to form high-commitment defense pacts
rather than lower commitment entente or neutrality pacts (as coded by the
Correlates of War Project).49 They show that at the dyadic level there is
a strong tendency for democratic states to form alliances with each other
at a greater rate than would be expected from the null model assumption
that alliance formation should be independent of ideological orientation.
My goal here is to expand on these results with an attempt to assess
the relative durability of democratic and nondemocratic alliances. The
statistical analysis of Holsti, Hopmann, and Sullivan is largely limited to
contingency table analysis. In this article, I focus on the case of democratic
states to confirm the rather tentative relationship they describe for the
relationship between alliance duration and ideological affinity. By using
more sophisticated techniques for analyzing duration data, I am able to
provide a more nuanced assessment of the effect of shared democratic
norms on alliance duration.

46
47
48
49

Holsti, Hopmann, and Sullivan 1973.
Ibid., 61–68.
Ibid., 160–61.
Siverson and Emmons 1991.

58

International Law and International Relations
The Data: Measuring Democracy and Measuring Alliances

Two kinds of data are required for this analysis: data about polities
and data about alliances. *** I have used Doyle’s coding of liberal regimes
and the coding of alliances from the Correlates of War Project.50 ***
For my purposes here, the democracy measure is reasonably straightforward. It is not necessary to resolve the significant debates about the
meaning of these terms in political philosophy and comparative politics in
order to advance propositions about the implications of liberal democracy for foreign policy and international relations. Even the problematic
distinction between ‘‘liberal’’ and ‘‘democratic’’ retreats in importance in
the face of the empirical reality that the two phenomena have been highly
coincident in modern history. There is a relatively clear set of states that
have been regularly labeled as either ‘‘democratic’’ or ‘‘liberal.’’ While one
might disagree about some cases on the edges, the results I report here are
not sensitive to small definitional changes. ***
The conceptual problems surrounding the measurement of alliances
are more immediately serious. *** One particularly vexing conceptual
issue is whether alliance behavior should be analyzed with the alliance as
the unit of measurement or with the dyad as the unit. *** Conceptual
arguments are valid in both directions. A focus on formal treaties would
lead us to concentrate on the alliance as the observation: how long treaties
are in force would be the most relevant question. If, however, we are
interested conceptually in the underlying relations between individual
countries, we will need to turn to the analysis of dyads. A focus on the
alliance as the unit of observation also runs into problems when multiple
treaties reflect the same relationship. For example, while a single treaty
unites the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries, the
Warsaw Pact countries cemented their relationship with a large number of
bilateral treaties. The use of treaties as the unit of observation would bias
the data toward this kind of multilateral relationship. The use of dyads as
the unit of observation would give extra weight to multilateral treaties.
Both biases present serious problems. In both cases, multilateral alliances
lead to problems in assessing the relationship between individual states
when formal relationships end because of a falling out between other
alliance members. *** My approach is to statistically test both kinds of
data. The fact that the findings are reasonably robust with both data
sets increases our confidence in the results.
50

See Doyle 1983; and Singer and Small 1966, respectively.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 59
* * *
Translating the Singer–Small data to the alliance level from the dyadic
level is more complex than it might appear on first blush. The decisions
I have made in this regard are not always transparent and thus bear some
discussion. Should we count the West European Union as a different
treaty than NATO? Is the Rio Pact with Cuba a different alliance than
the Rio Pact without Cuba? I have used two different kinds of decision
rules, and the results seem reasonably insensitive to these coding
variations. First, I tried to identify the individual treaties and gave them
their longest life, regardless of new members coming and going (reduced
model 1). Second, I identified starting and ending dates in the dyadic data
set and collapsed the data around these values (reduced model 2). The
first method tends to overcount multilateral alliances that use bilateral
treaties, such as the Warsaw Pact. The second method overcounts
multilateral alliances that have more changes over time, such as NATO
or the Arab League.
Multilateral treaties are also problematic for coding the democracy
variable when they include states with different political systems. My
focus in this article is on relationships between democratic states, so I
have chosen in both of these reduced data sets to decompose treaties
that have mixed democratic and nondemocratic members. Thus, for
example, I code NATO as three observations: a relationship between
democracies, a relationship between democracies and nondemocracies,
and a relationship between nondemocracies. Interestingly, this affected
only six alliances, including three nineteenth-century alliances involving
Britain, France, or Italy in their democratic periods, NATO, the Rio
Pact, and the Arab League (which included Lebanon when it was coded
as liberal).
International Alliance Behavior and Democratic States
Figure 3.1 tracks the average number of alliance relationships for
democratic and nondemocratic states for each decade between 1815 and
1965. *** Before 1870 there were very few democratic states, and those
states had decidedly fewer alliance relationships of any kind than the
nondemocratic states. After 1870, the curves for the democratic and
nondemocratic states follow one another very closely. From 1870 until
1920, alliance relationships were at a fairly low level for both democratic
and nondemocratic states. Finally, in 1920 a strong trend began toward an
increasing number of alliance relationships. The significant changes over

International Law and International Relations

60
12
10

Nondemocratic states
Democratic states

8
6
4
2

5
–6

5
56
19

5

–5
46

19

5

–4
36

19

5
19

26

–3

5

–2

–1

16
19

5
–0

06
19

5
–9

96
18

5
86
18

5

–8
76

18

5

–7
66

18

5

–6
56

18

5

–5

–4

46
18

5
–3

36
18

–2
18

16
18

26

5

0

Decade
figure 3.1. Average alliance density per decade, 1816–1965.

time support the notion that alliance norms have evolved over the past
two centuries.51
* * *
Figure 3.1 is, of course, a simple representation of the relationship
between alliances and democracy with no controls for confounding
factors. On its face, this pattern would give the most support to the expectation that domestic regime type should not make much difference in
international behavior in general and in the ability to make commitments
in particular. These results do not support the idea that democratic states
should be more alliance-prone, but neither do they support the more
often expressed concern that democratic states cannot make credible commitments. Democratic states find just as many alliance partners as nondemocratic states. *** Either Salisbury was wrong or something has
changed since he suggested that democratic states cannot keep their
promises and thus will have trouble entering into alliances. At a minimum,
democratic states are finding other states that are at least willing to sign
the papers.
*** The question in which we are most interested is not simply
how many alliance relationships democratic states enter, but rather what
level of commitment those relationships represent. We can move one
analytic step closer to this more fundamental issue by considering the
length of time that democratic and nondemocratic alliances tend to last.
51

On the evolution of alliance norms, see Kegley and Raymond 1990.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 61
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Democratic states
Mixed
Nondemocratic states

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Duration (years)
figure 3.2. Alliance survival functions (Kaplan–Meier estimates) for alliances
by treaty (reduced model 1).

The Duration of Alliances
Statistical analysis of duration data is made treacherous by several factors.
Briefly, the two primary problems are nonlinear relationships and the
censoring of data.52 Duration data are said to be right-censored when the
events are still ongoing at the end of the observation period. For example,
a seemingly robust alliance that starts just two years before the end of the
observation period should not be coded as having ended after just two
years. If we did not take censoring into account, we would bias our
analysis for all the cases of alliances that were still in effect at the end of
the period of observation. This bias is nontrivial because it would tend
to be the alliances that were the longest lasting that would be censored.
This is of particular importance in the study of alliances, because a large
number of alliances are still ongoing.
The most common method for examining survival data, given these
problems, is the use of Kaplan–Meier or product-limit estimates of the
survival function. *** The Kaplan–Meier estimate of the probability that
an alliance will last k years is the product of the estimate of the probability
that the alliance will last k 1 years and the observed survival rate in year
k. Thus, censored and uncensored observations will provide information
as to the number of alliances that last k 1 years, while the uncensored
observations will provide the observed survival rate in any given year.53
Figure 3.2 displays the Kaplan–Meier estimates of survival times for the
52

53

For a thorough review of the statistical issues, see Kiefer 1988. For a discussion that is
more oriented toward political science, see Bienen and Van de Walle 1991, chap. 3.
Lee 1992, chaps. 4 and 5.

62

International Law and International Relations
table 3.1. Predicted Alliance Durations (expected
duration in years of a defense pact starting in 1925
between two major powers)
Democratic
alliances

Mixed
alliances

Nondemocratic
alliances

All alliances
Dyads
Model 1
Model 2

17.1
8.8
12.6

9.8
3.4
6.7

10.7
4.2
6.6

Defense pacts
Dyads
Model 1
Model 2

39.0
30.6
30.8

16.3
18.5
18.7

10.6
18.4
18.5

first reduced data set based on treaties. The three lines show the estimated
survival function for democratic alliances, nondemocratic alliances, and
mixed alliances. The distinctiveness of democratic alliances is clearly
visible in this figure. Reading across the chart at the 50-percent survival
mark, we can see that the median survival time for both mixed and nondemocratic alliances is about seven years, while democratic alliances have
a median survival time of about seventeen years. A generalized Wilcoxon
rank test shows this difference to be significant at the 0.005 level.
The central limitation of the Kaplan–Meier estimates is that they are
nonparametric. While they provide an effective visual indicator of survival
patterns, it is difficult to control for important covariates or to specify
more exactly the independent effect of democracy on alliance duration.
A next step, then, is to turn to a parametric survival model. The model I
use here to assess the effects of democracy on alliance duration is an
accelerated failure time model *** using the LIFEREG procedure in SAS.
* * *
This model does show a significant effect for the duration of alliances
between liberal domocracies. These effects are consistent in direction
across all of the aggregations of the data and are statistically significant for
the dual democracy coefficient in all of the models that use all alliances and
for one of the dual democracy coefficients in the defense pact models. ***
The impact *** can be seen more concretely in the examples given in
Table 3.1. For the purposes of illustration, I have presented the predicted
durations of a defense pact between two major powers that starts in 1925.

Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations 63
With all of the other independent variables held constant, the effect of the
democracy variables is clearly visible in each row of the table. Most of the
models predict fairly similar results.
As in the Siverson and Emmons work and the work on democracies
and wars, it is again the dyadic effects of democracy that are the most
notable.54 We can make a distinction between the case of two democracies and either one or no democracies. But there is no statistically
significant separation between the cases of one democracy and no democracies. Democracies are no different than nondemocracies when it
comes to relationships with nondemocracies. It is only alliances between
democracies that appear to be more durable. If alliance duration is an
indicator of the ability to make commitments, then democracy by itself
does not appear to either increase or decrease the ability of a state to make
commitments to nondemocracies.
That democracies would be no worse at making commitments than
nondemocracies is itself interesting in light of the frequent concerns about
the instability of democratic decision making. The dyadic finding, however, suggests that the important explanations do not lie within the stability of democratic institutions themselves. Rather, the most promising
source of explanation for these findings is likely to be either in the distinctive preferences democratic states may hold for maintaining their
relationships with each other or in the institutional elements that develop
in the relationships between democratic states.
* * *

conclusions
The central characteristic of liberal democracies is juridically limited majority rule. For foreign policy decision making, this has meant that decision makers are limited in their ability to commit the state both because
of the limits in their power at any given time – for example, the requirement that the President of the United States submit treaties to the Senate
for ratification – and because of the possibility that public preferences
will change. Drawing on these characteristics, the most traditional argument about the relationship between democratic states and commitment
in the international system focuses on the inconstant commons and the
expectation that democratic governance will be particularly ill-suited to
54

Siverson and Emmons 1991. On democracy and war, see, for example, Small and Singer
1976; Maoz and Abdolali 1989; Russett 1990; and 1993.

64

International Law and International Relations

long lasting commitments. The relationship between polity type and
the ability to make commitments is more complex than this traditional
argument would allow. As Riker has argued, there is a theoretical basis
for policy stability in liberal democratic regimes; and this has been
supported in several studies of foreign policy stability. Moreover, at the
theoretical level, the creation of links between external commitments and
internal commitments and the development of shared preferences through
interdependence should also enhance the ability of liberal democracies
to forge effective international commitments.
Ultimately, these factors will have to be disentangled and their individual importance assessed empirically to discern the net effect of the
factors that push for and against democratic commitments. I have offered
here a start on that empirical task with a broad analysis of the duration
of democratic alliances. Consistent with the conjectures of Doyle and
Kant, there are distinctive elements in the alliance behavior of democratic
states. As Siverson and Emmons have shown, democracies tend to ally
with other democracies.55 I have shown here that these alliances tend to
last longer than either the relationships between nondemocracies or the
relationships that mix democracies and nondemocracies. Democratic
alliances do appear distinctively durable when measured against the
background of the constantly shifting international environment. More
work will be required before we will want to endorse a robust version of
the ‘‘pacific union’’ of democratic states. We can be more emphatic in the
assertion that contrary to the pessimistic views of the likes of Tocqueville
or Salisbury, democratic states have not demonstrated an inability to
make lasting commitments.
55

Siverson and Emmons 1991.

4
On Compliance
Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes

In an increasingly complex and interdependent world, negotiation,
adoption, and implementation of international agreements is a major
component of the foreign policy activity of every state.1 International
agreements come in a variety of shapes and sizes formal and informal,
bilateral and multiparty, universal and regional. Our concern is with
contemporary agreements of relatively high political salience in fields
such as security, economics, and environment, where the treaty is a central
structural element in a broader international regulatory regime. Some of
these agreements are little more than statements of general principle,
while others contain detailed prescriptions for a defined field of interaction. Still others may be umbrella agreements for consensus building

1

Barry E. Carter and Phillip R. Trimble, International Law (Boston: Little, Brown, 1991),
pp. 133–252, cite a statistical study showing that of 10,189 U.S. treaties and international
agreements made between 1789 and 1979, 8,955 were concluded between 1933 and
1979 (see p. 169). In the U.S. lexicon, the term ‘‘treaty’’ is reserved for international
agreements ratified with the advice and consent of the Senate in accordance with Article
2, cl. 2 of the Constitution. Other international agreements are concluded by the President, in the great majority of cases with the authorization of Congress. All of these are
‘‘treaties’’ according to international usage, which defines a treaty as ‘‘an international
agreement, concluded between states in written form and governed by international
law.’’ See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (entered into force on 27 January
1980) Article 2(1)(a), in International Legal Materials, vol. 8 (Washington, D.C.: The
American Society of International Law, July 1969), pp. 679–735, at 701 (hereafter
cited as Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties). The computer bank of the United
Nations (UN) Treaty Office shows treaty growth, including multilateral and bilateral
treaties and amendments, as follows: 373 treaties were entered into during the ten-year
period ending in 1955; 498 in the period ending in 1965; 808 in the period ending in
1975; 461 in the period ending in 1985; and 915 in the period ending in 1991.

65

66

International Law and International Relations

in preparation for more specific regulation. Most of the agreements of
concern are [now] multilateral.
We believe that when nations enter into an international agreement
of this kind, they alter their behavior, their relationships, and their
expectations of one another over time in accordance with its terms. That
is, they will to some extent comply with the undertakings they have made.2
How or why this should be so is the subject of a burgeoning literature
and debate in which, for the first time in half a century, the possibility of
fruitful dialogue between international lawyers and students of international relations has emerged. This article explores some basic propositions we think should frame this discussion.
First, the general level of compliance with international agreements
cannot be fully empirically verified. That nations generally comply with
their international agreements, on the one hand, and that they violate
them whenever it is ‘‘in their interests to do so’’ are not statements of
fact or even hypotheses to be tested, but assumptions. We give some
reasons why we think the background assumption of a propensity to
comply is plausible and useful.
Second, compliance problems often do not reflect a deliberate decision
to violate an international undertaking on the basis of a calculation of
interests. We propose a variety of other (and in our view more usual)
reasons why states may deviate from treaty obligations and why, in
particular circumstances, these reasons are accepted by the parties as
justifying such departures.
Third, the treaty regime as a whole need not and should not be held
to a standard of strict compliance but to a level of overall compliance
that is ‘‘acceptable’’ in the light of the interests and concerns the treaty is
designed to safeguard. We consider how the ‘‘acceptable level’’ is determined and adjusted.

background assumption
According to Louis Henkin, ‘‘almost all nations observe almost all principles of international law and almost all of their obligations almost all
2

We are mindful of the distinction between treaty compliance and regime effectiveness. See
Oran Young, ‘‘The Effectiveness of International Institutions: Hard Cases and Critical
Variables,’’ in James N. Rosenau and Ernst-Otto Czempiel, eds., Governance Without
Government: Order and Change in World Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992), pp. 160–92.

On Compliance

67

of the time.’’3 The observation is frequently repeated [without either
empirical support or refutation.] A moment’s reflection shows that it
would not be easy to devise a statistical protocol that would generate
such evidence. For example, how would Iraq’s unbroken respect for the
borders of Turkey, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia count in the reckoning
against the invasions of Iran and Kuwait?
Equally, and for much the same reasons, there is no way to validate
empirically the position of mainstream realist international relations
theory going back to Machiavelli, that ‘‘a prudent ruler cannot keep his
word, nor should he, where such fidelity would damage him, and when the
reasons that made him promise are no longer relevant.’’4 Contemporary
realists accept that the interest in reciprocal observation of treaty norms
by other parties or a more general interest in the state’s reputation as
a reliable contractual partner should be counted in the trade-off of costs
and benefits on which a decision is based (an extension that detracts
considerably from the power and elegance of the realist formula).5 No
calculus, however, will supply a rigorous, non-tautological answer to the
question whether a state observed a particular treaty obligation, much
less its treaty obligations generally, only when it was in its interest to do
so. Anecdotal evidence abounds for both the normative and the realist
propositions, but neither of them, in their general form, is subject to
statistical or empirical proof. The difference between the two schools is
not one of fact but of the background assumption that informs their
approach to the subject.
A critical question for any study of compliance, then, is which background assumption to adopt, and that question is to be resolved not on
the basis of whether the assumption is ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ but whether or
not it is helpful for the particular inquiry. Thus, for game-theoretic approaches that focus on the abstract structure of the relationship between
3

4

5

See Louis Henkin. How Nations Behave, 2d ed. (New York: Columbia University Press,
1979), p. 47; and p. 69 of Louis Henkin, ‘‘International Law: Politics, Values, and
Functions: General Course on Public International Law,’’ Recueil Des Cours, vol. 216,
1989, pp. 1–416, emphasis original.
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince, eds. Quentin Skinner and Russell Price (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 61–62. For a modern instance, see Hans J.
Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 5th ed. (New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978), p. 560: ‘‘In my experience [states] will keep their bargains
as long as it is in their interest.’’
See, for example, James A. Caporaso, ‘‘International Relations Theory and Multilateralism: The Search for Foundations,’’ International Organization 46 (Summer 1992), pp.
599–632.

68

International Law and International Relations

states, the realist assumption of a unitary rational actor optimizing utilities
distributed along smooth preference curves may have value. As Thomas
Schelling said at the beginning of his classic work, ‘‘The premise of
‘rational behavior’ is a potent one for the production of theory. Whether
the resulting theory provides good or poor insight into actual behavior
is . . . a matter for subsequent judgment.’’
Our interest in this work is in improving the prospects for compliance with treaties, both at the drafting stage and later as the parties live
and operate under them. From this perspective, the realist analysis,
focusing on a narrow set of externally defined ‘‘interests’’ primarily, in
the classical version, the maintenance or enhancement of state military
and economic power is not very helpful. Improving compliance becomes
a matter of the manipulation of burdens and benefits defined in terms of
those interests, which translates into the application of military or economic sanctions. Because these are costly, difficult to mobilize, and of
doubtful efficacy, they are infrequently used in practice. Meanwhile,
analytic attention is diverted from a wide range of institutional and
political mechanisms that in practice bear the burden of efforts to enhance
treaty compliance.
For a study of the methods by which compliance can be improved, the
background assumption of a general propensity of states to comply with
international obligations, which is the basis on which most practitioners
carry out their work, seems more illuminating.6
Efficiency
Decisions are not a free good. Governmental resources for policy analysis and decision making are costly and in short supply. Individuals and
organizations seek to conserve those resources for the most urgent and
pressing matters.7 In these circumstances, standard economic analysis
argues against the continuous recalculation of costs and benefits in the
absence of convincing evidence that circumstances have changed since
the original decision. Efficiency dictates considerable policy continuity.
6

7

See Oran R. Young, Compliance and Public Authority: A Theory with International
Applications (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979), pp. 31–34.
See George Stigler, ‘‘The Economics of Information,’’ Journal of Political Economy
69 (June 1961), pp. 213–25; G. J. Stigler and G. S. Becker, ‘‘De Gustibus non Est
Disputandum’’ (There is no disputing taste), in Karen S. Cook and Margaret Levi, eds.,
The Limits of Rationality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), pp. 191–216;
Charles E. Lindblom, The Policy Making Process (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1968), p. 14.

On Compliance

69

In areas of activity covered by treaty obligations, the alternative to recalculation is to follow the established rule.
Organization theory would reach the same result as economic analysis, but by a different route. In place of the continuously calculating,
maximizing rational actor, it substitutes a ‘‘satisficing’’ model of bounded
rationality that reacts to problems as they arise and searches for solutions
within a familiar and accustomed repertoire.8 In this analysis, bureaucratic organizations are viewed as functioning according to routines and
standard operating procedures, often specified by authoritative rules and
regulations. The adoption of a treaty, like the enactment of any other
law, establishes an authoritative rule system. Compliance is the normal
organizational presumption.
The bureaucracy is not monolithic, of course, and it will likely contain
opponents of the treaty regime as well as supporters. When there is an
applicable rule in a treaty or otherwise, opposition ordinarily surfaces in
the course of rule implementation and takes the form of argument over
interpretation of language and definition of the exact content of the
obligation. Such controversies are settled in accordance with normal
bureaucratic procedures in which, again, the presumption is in favor of
‘‘following’’ the rule.
Interests
The assertion that states carry out treaty commitments only when it is in
their interest to do so seems to imply that commitments are somehow
unrelated to interests. In fact, the opposite is true. The most basic principle of international law is that states cannot be legally bound except
with their own consent. So, in the first instance, the state need not enter
into a treaty that does not conform to its interests.
More important, a treaty does not present the state with a simple binary
alternative, to sign or not to sign. Treaties, like other legal arrangements,
are artifacts of political choice and social existence. The process by which
they are formulated and concluded is designed to ensure that the final
result will represent, to some degree, an accommodation of the interests of the negotiating states. Modern treaty making, like legislation in
8

Herbert Simon, Models of Man: Social and Rational Mathematical Essays on Rational
Human Behavior in a Social Setting (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1957), pp. 200–204.
See also James G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1958), p. 169. For an example of this model of organizational behavior applied
to the analysis of international affairs, see Graham T. Allison, The Essence of Decision:
Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1971).

70

International Law and International Relations

a democratic polity, can be seen as a creative enterprise through which
the parties not only weigh the benefits and burdens of commitment but
explore, redefine, and sometimes discover their interests. It is at its best
a learning process in which not only national positions but also conceptions of national interest evolve.
This process goes on both within each state and at the international
level. In a state with a well-developed bureaucracy, the elaboration of
national positions in preparation for treaty negotiations requires extensive interagency vetting. Different officials with different responsibilities
and objectives engage in what amounts to a sustained internal negotiation. The process can be seen in every major U.S. international negotiation.
For example, at the end of what Ambassador Richard Benedick calls
‘‘the interagency minuet’’ in preparation for the Vienna Convention for
the Protection of the Ozone Layer, the final U.S. position ‘‘was drafted by
the State Department and was formally cleared by the Departments of
Commerce and Energy, The Council on Environmental Quality, EPA
[Environmental Protection Agency], NASA, NOAA [National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration], OMB [Office of Management
and Budget], USTR [U.S. Trade Representative], and the Domestic Policy
Council (representing all other interested agencies).’’9 In addition to this
formidable alphabet soup, White House units, like the Office of Science
and Technology Policy, the Office of Policy Development, and the Council of Economic Advisers, also got into the act. According to Trimble,
‘‘each agency has a distinctive perspective from which it views the process
and which influences the position it advocates. . . . All these interests must
be accommodated, compromised or overriden by the President before
a position can even be put on the table.’’10
In the United States in recent years, increasing involvement of Congress and with it nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and the broader
public has introduced a new range of interests that must ultimately be
reflected in the national position.11 Similar developments seem to be
occurring in other democratic countries.
9

10
11

Richard Benedick, Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet
(Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1991), pp. 51–53. Other states, at least
in advanced industrialized societies, exhibit similar, if perhaps not quite as baroque,
internal practices in preparation for negotiations. Developing countries, with small
resources to commit to bureaucratic coordination, may rely more on the judgment and
inspiration of representatives on the scene.
Trimble, ‘‘Arms Control and International Negotiation Theory,’’ p. 550.
See Benedick, Ozone Diplomacy, p. 57; Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Power
and Interdependence, 2d ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1989). p. 35.

On Compliance

71

In contrast to day-to-day foreign policy decision making that is oriented toward current political exigencies and imminent deadlines and is
focused heavily on short-term costs and benefits, the more deliberate
process employed in treaty making may serve to identify and reinforce
longer range interests and values. Officials engaged in developing the
negotiating position often have an additional reason to take a long-range
view, since they may have operational responsibility under any agreement
that is reached.12 What they say and how they conduct themselves at the
negotiating table may return to haunt them once the treaty has gone into
effect. Moreover, they are likely to attach considerable importance to the
development of governing norms that will operate predictably when
applied to the behavior of the parties over time. All these convergent
elements tend to influence national positions in the direction of broadbased conceptions of the national interest that, if adequately reflected in
the treaty, will help to induce compliance.
The internal analysis, negotiation, and calculation of the benefits,
burdens, and impacts are repeated, for contemporary regulatory treaties,
at the international level.13 In anticipation of negotiations, the issues are
reviewed in international forums long before formal negotiation begins.
The negotiating process itself characteristically involves intergovernmental
debate often lasting years and involving not only other national governments but also international bureaucracies and NGOs. The most notable
case is the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, in which that process
lasted for more than ten years, spawning innumerable committees, subcommittees, and working groups, only to be torpedoed in the end by the
United States, which had sponsored the negotiations in the first place.14
Current environmental negotiations on ozone and on global warming
follow very much the Law of the Sea pattern. The first conference on
12

13

14

Hudec uses the examples of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the
International Trade Organization (ITO): ‘‘For the better part of the first decade, GATT
meetings resembled a reunion of the GATT/ITO draftsmen themselves. Failure of the
code would have meant a personal failure to many of these officials, and violation of
rules they had helped to write could not help being personally embarrassing.’’ See p. 1365
of Robert E. Hudec, ‘‘GATT or GABB? The Future Design of the General Agreement of
Tariffs and Trade,’’ Yale Law Journal 80 (June 1971), pp. 1299–386. See also Robert E.
Hudec, The GATT Legal System and World Trade Diplomacy, 2d ed. (Salem, N. H.:
Butterworth Legal Publishers, 1990), p. 54.
Robert D. Putnam, ‘‘Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level Games,’’
International Organization 42 (Summer 1988), pp. 427–60.
See James K. Sebenius, Negotiating the Law of the Sea (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1984); and William Wertenbaker, ‘‘The Law of the Sea,’’ parts 1 and 2,
The New Yorker, 1 August 1983, pp. 38–65, and 8 August 1983, pp. 56–83, respectively.

72

International Law and International Relations

stratospheric ozone was convoked by the UN Environment Program
(UNEP) in 1977, eight years before the adoption of the Vienna Convention on the Protection of the Ozone Layer.15 The formal beginning of the
climate change negotiations in February 1991 was preceded by two years
of work by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, convened
by the World Meteorological Organization and the UNEP to consider
scientific, technological, and policy response questions.16
Much of this negotiating activity is open to some form of public
scrutiny, triggering repeated rounds of national bureaucratic and political review and revision of tentative accommodations among affected
interests. The treaty as finally signed and presented for ratification is
therefore likely to be based on considered and well-developed conceptions
of national interest that have themselves been shaped to some extent by
the preparatory and negotiating process.
Treaty making is not purely consensual, of course. Negotiations are
heavily affected by the structure of the international system, in which some
states are much more powerful than others. As noted, the Convention of the
Law of the Sea, the product of more than a decade of international negotiations, was ultimately derailed when a new U.S. administration found it
unacceptable. On the other hand, a multilateral negotiating forum provides opportunities for weaker states to form coalitions and exploit blocking positions. In the same UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, the caucus
of what were known as ‘‘land-locked and geographically disadvantaged
states,’’ which included such unlikely colleagues as Hungary, Switzerland,
Austria, Uganda, Nepal, and Bolivia, had a crucial strategic position. The
Association of Small Island States, chaired by Vanuatu, played a similar
role in the global climate negotiations. Like domestic legislation, the international treaty-making process leaves a good deal of room for accommodating divergent interests. In such a setting, not even the strongest state will
be able to achieve all of its objectives, and some participants may have to
settle for much less. The treaty is necessarily a compromise, ‘‘a bargain that

15

16

As early as 1975, the UNEP funded a World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
technical conference on implications of U.S. ozone layer research. But the immediate
precursor of the negotiating conference in Vienna came in March 1977, when the UNEP
sponsored a policy meeting of governments and international agencies in Washington,
D.C., that drafted a ‘‘World Plan of Action on the Ozone Layer.’’ See Benedick, Ozone
Diplomacy, p. 40.
The Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change was set up by the UNEP and WMO after
the passage of UN General Assembly Resolution 43/53, A/RES/43/53, 27 January 1989,
‘‘Resolution on the Protection of the Global Climate.’’

On Compliance

73

[has] been made.’’17 From the point of view of the particular interests of
any state, the outcome may fall short of the ideal. But if the agreement
is well designed, sensible, comprehensible, and with a practical eye to
probable patterns of conduct and interaction–compliance problems and
enforcement issues are likely to be manageable. If issues of noncompliance
and enforcement are endemic, the real problem is likely to be that the
original bargain did not adequately reflect the interests of those that would
be living under it, rather than mere disobedience.18
It is true that a state’s incentives at the treaty-negotiating stage may be
different from those it faces when the time for compliance rolls around.
Parties on the giving end of the compromise, especially, might have reason
to seek to escape the obligations they have undertaken. Nevertheless, the
very act of making commitments embodied in an international agreement
changes the calculus at the compliance stage, if only because it generates
expectations of compliance in others that must enter into the equation.
Moreover, although states may know they can violate their treaty
commitments in a crunch, they do not negotiate agreements with the idea
that they can do so in routine situations. Thus, the shape of the substantive bargain will itself be affected by the parties’ estimates of the costs and
risks of their own compliance and expectations about the compliance of
others. Essential parties may be unwilling to accept or impose stringent
regulations if the prospects for compliance are doubtful. The negotiation
will not necessarily collapse on that account, however. The result may be a
looser, more general engagement. Such an outcome is often deprecated as
a lowest-common-denominator outcome, with what is really important
left on the cutting room floor. But it may be the beginning of increasingly
serious and concerted attention to the problem.
Finally, the treaty that comes into force does not remain static and
unchanging. Treaties that last must be able to adapt to inevitable changes
in the economic, technological, social, and political setting. Treaties may
be formally amended, of course, or modified by the addition of a protocol, but these methods are slow and cumbersome. Since they are subject to
the same ratification process as the original treaty, they can be blocked or
17

18

Susan Strange, ‘‘Cave! Hic Dragones: A Critique of Regime Analysis,’’ in Stephen D.
Krasner, ed., International Regimes (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1983), pp.
337–54; at 353.
Systems in which compliance can only be achieved through extensive use of coercion are
rightly regarded as authoritarian and unjust. See Michael Barkun, Law Without
Sanctions: Order in Primitive Societies and the World Community (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1968), p. 62.

74

International Law and International Relations

avoided by a dissatisfied party. As a result, treaty lawyers have devised
a number of ways to deal with the problem of adaptation without seeking formal amendment. The simplest is the device of vesting the power
to ‘‘interpret’’ the agreement in some organ established by the treaty. The
U.S. Constitution, after all, has kept up with the times not primarily by
the amending process but by the Supreme Court’s interpretation of its
broad clauses. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) Agreement gives
such power to the Governing Board, and numerous key questions including the crucial issue of ‘‘conditionality,’’ whether drawings against the
fund’s resources may be conditioned on the economic performance of
the drawing member have been resolved by this means.19
A number of treaties establish authority to make regulations on
technical matters by vote of the parties (usually by a special majority),
which are then binding on all, though often with the right to opt out.
The International Civil Aeronautics Organization has such power with
respect to operational and safety matters in international air transport.20
In many regulatory treaties, ‘‘technical’’ matters may be relegated to an
annex that can be altered by vote of the parties.21 In sum, treaties characteristically contain self-adjusting mechanisms by which, over a significant range, they can be and in practice are commonly adapted to respond
to shifting interests of the parties.

norms
Treaties are acknowledged to be legally binding on the states that ratify
them.22 In common experience, people, whether as a result of socialization
19

20

21

22

Articles of Agreement of the IMF, 27 December 1945, as amended, Article 8, sec. 5, in
United Nations Treaty Series (UNTS), vol. 2, Treaty no. 20 (New York: United Nations,
1947), p. 39. For the conditionality decision, see decision no. 102-(52/11) 13 February
1952, ‘‘Selected Decisions of the Executive Directors and Selected Documents,’’ p. 16.
Convention on International Civil Aviation, 7 December 1944, Article 90, in UNTS, vol.
15, Treaty no. 102, 1948, p. 295.
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, in International Legal
Materials, vol. 26, 1987, p. 1541, Article 2(9) (signed 16 September 1987 and entered
into force 1 January 1989; hereafter cited as Montreal Protocol) as amended, London
Adjustment and Amendments to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer, in International Legal Materials, vol. 30, 1991, p. 537 (signed 29 June 1990
and entered into force 7 March 1991; hereafter cited as London Amendments).
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, signed 23 May 1969 (entered into force
on 27 January 1980), Article 2(1)(a), states that ‘‘‘treaty’ means an international agreement concluded between States in written form and governed by international law,
whether embodied in a single instrument or in two or more related instruments and
whatever its particular designation.’’ See UN Doc. A/CONF. 39/27.

On Compliance

75

or otherwise, accept that they are obligated to obey the law. So it is with
states. It is often said that the fundamental norm of international law is
pacta sunt servanda (treaties are to be obeyed).23 In the United States and
many other countries, they become a part of the law of the land. Thus, a
provision contained in an agreement to which a state has formally assented
entails a legal obligation to obey and is presumptively a guide to action.
This proposition is deeply ingrained in common understanding and
often reflected in the speech of national leaders. Yet the realist argument
that national actions are governed entirely by calculation of interests
(including the interest in stability and predictability served by a system of
rules) is essentially a denial of the operation of normative obligation in
international affairs. This position has held the field for some time in
mainstream international relations theory (as have closely related postulates in other positivist social science disciplines).24 But it is increasingly
being challenged by a growing body of empirical study and academic
analysis.
Such scholars as Elinor Ostrom and Robert Ellickson show how
relatively small communities in contained circumstances generate and
secure compliance with norms, even without the intervention of a supervening sovereign authority.25 Others, like Frederick Schauer and Friedrich
Kratochwil, analyze how norms operate in decision-making processes,
whether as ‘‘reasons for action’’ or in defining the methods and terms
of discourse.26 Even Jon Elster says ‘‘I have come to believe that social
norms provide an important kind of motivation for action that is irreducible to rationality or indeed to any other form of optimizing mechanism.’’27
23

24

25

26

27

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 26, specifies that ‘‘every treaty in
force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed in good faith.’’ See also
chap. 30 of Arnold Duncan McNair, The Law of Treaties (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1961), pp. 493–505.
William Eskridge, Jr., and G. Peller, ‘‘The New Public Law: Moderation as a Postmodern
Cultural Form,’’ Michigan Law Review 89 (February 1991), pp. 707–91.
See Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990): and Robert C. Ellickson,
Order Without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1991).
See Frederick F. Schauer, Playing by the Rules: A Philosophical Examination of Rulebased Decision-making in Law and Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991): Kratochwil,
Rules, Norms and Decisions; and Sally Falk Moore, Law as Process (London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1978).
Jon Elster, The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989), p. 15. See also Margaret Levi, Karen S. Cook, Jodi A. O’Brien,
and Howard Fay, ‘‘Introduction: The Limits of Rationality,’’ in Cook and Levi, The
Limits of Rationality, pp. 1–16.

76

International Law and International Relations

The strongest circumstantial evidence for the sense of an obligation
to comply with treaties is the care that states take in negotiating and
entering into them. It is not conceivable that foreign ministries and
government leaders could devote time and energy on the scale they do to
preparing, drafting, negotiating, and monitoring treaty obligations unless
there is an assumption that entering into a treaty commitment ought to
and does constrain the state’s own freedom of action and an expectation
that the other parties to the agreement will feel similarly constrained.
The care devoted to fashioning a treaty provision no doubt reflects the
desire to limit the state’s own commitment as much as to make evasion by
others more difficult. In either case, the enterprise makes sense only on the
assumption that, as a general rule, states acknowledge an obligation to
comply with agreements they have signed. In the United States and other
Western countries, the principle that the exercise of governmental power
in general is subject to law lends additional force to an ethos of national
compliance with international undertakings.28 And, of course, appeals
to legal obligations are a staple of foreign policy debate and of the continuous critique and defense of foreign policy actions that account for so
much of diplomatic interchange and international political commentary.
All this argues that states, like other subjects of legal rules, operate
under a sense of obligation to conform their conduct to governing norms.

varieties of noncomplying behavior
If the state’s decision whether or not to comply with a treaty is the result
of a calculation of costs and benefits, as the realists assert, the implication
is that noncompliance is the premeditated and deliberate violation of a
treaty obligation. Our background assumption does not exclude that such
decisions may occur from time to time, especially when the circumstances
underlying the original bargain have changed significantly.29 Or, as in the
28

29

It is not clear, however, that democracies are more law-abiding. See Diggs v. Shultz, 470
F. 2d 461 (D.C. Cir. 1972): ‘‘Under our constitutional scheme, Congress can denounce
treaties if it sees fit to do so, and there is nothing the other branches of the government can
do about it. We consider that is precisely what Congress has done in this case’’ (pp. 466–67).
International law recognizes a limited scope for abrogation of an agreement in such
a case. See the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 62. Generally, however,
the possibility of change is accommodated by provisions for amendment, authoritative
interpretation, or even withdrawal from the agreement. See, for example, the withdrawal
provision of the ABM Treaty, Article 25(2), or the Limited Test Ban Treaty, Article 4.
None of these actions poses an issue of violation of legal obligations, though they may
weaken the regime of which the treaty is a part.

On Compliance

77

area of international human rights, it may happen that a state will enter
into an international agreement to appease a domestic or international
constituency but have little intention of carrying it out. A passing
familiarity with foreign affairs, however, suggests that only infrequently
does a treaty violation fall into the category of a willful flouting of legal
obligation.30
At the same time, general observation as well as detailed studies often
reveal what appear or are alleged to be significant departures from established treaty norms. If these are not deliberate violations, what explains
this behavior? We discuss three circumstances, infrequently recognized
in discussions of compliance, that in our view often lie at the root of
behavior that may seem prima facie to violate treaty requirements:
(1) ambiguity and indeterminacy of treaty language, (2) limitations on
the capacity of parties to carry out their undertakings, and (3) the temporal dimension of the social and economic changes contemplated by
regulatory treaties.
These factors might be considered ‘‘causes’’ of noncompliance. But
from a lawyer’s perspective, it is illuminating to think of them as
‘‘defenses’’ – matters put forth to excuse or justify or extenuate a prima
facie case of breach. A defense, like all other issues of compliance, is
subject to the overriding obligation of good faith in the performance
of treaty obligations.31

ambiguity
Treaties, like other canonical statements of legal rules, frequently do not
provide determinate answers to specific disputed questions. Language
often is unable to capture meaning with precision. Treaty drafters do not
foresee many of the possible applications, let alone their contextual
settings. Issues that are foreseen often cannot be resolved at the time of
treaty negotiation and are swept under the rug.
Economic, technological, scientific, and even political circumstances
change. All these inescapable incidents of the effort to formulate rules to
30

31

Keohane surveyed two hundred years of U.S. foreign relations history and identified only
forty ‘‘theoretically interesting’’ cases of ‘‘inconvenient’’ commitments in which there
was a serious issue of whether or not to comply. See the chapter entitled ‘‘Commitments
and Compromise,’’ in Robert O. Keohane, ‘‘The Impact of Commitments on American
Foreign Policy,’’ manuscript, 1993, pp. 1–49.
See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 26; Lassa Oppenheim, International Law: A Treatise, 8th ed., ed. H. Lauterpacht (London: Longmans, 1955),
p. 956; and McNair, The Law of Treaties, p. 465.

78

International Law and International Relations

govern future conduct frequently produce a zone of ambiguity within
which it is difficult to say with precision what is permitted and what is
forbidden.
Of course, treaty language, like other legal language, comes in varying
degrees of specificity. The broader and more general the language, the
wider the ambit of permissible interpretations to which it gives rise. Yet
there are frequently reasons for choosing a more general formulation of
the obligation: the political consensus may not support more precision,
or, as with certain provisions of the U.S. Constitution, it may be wiser
to define a general direction, to try to inform a process, rather than seek to
foresee in detail the circumstances in which the words will be brought
to bear. If there is some confidence in those who are to apply the rules, a
broader standard defining the general policy behind the law may be
more effective in realizing it than a series of detailed regulations. The
North Atlantic Treaty has proved remarkably durable, though its language is remarkably general: ‘‘In order more effectively to achieve the
objectives of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and jointly, by means of
continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and
develop their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack.’’32
Detail also has its difficulties. As in the U.S. Internal Revenue Code,
precision generates loopholes, necessitating some procedure for continuous revision and authoritative interpretation. The complexities of
the rule system may give rise to shortcuts that reduce inefficiencies
when things are going well but may lead to friction when the political
atmosphere darkens.
In short, there will often be a considerable range within which parties
may reasonably adopt differing positions as to the meaning of the obligation. In domestic legal systems, courts or other authoritative institutions are empowered to resolve such disputes about meaning. The
international legal system can provide tribunals to settle such questions
if the parties consent. But compulsory means of authoritative dispute
resolution by adjudication or otherwise are not generally available at the
international level.33 Moreover, the issue of interpretation may not arise
in the context of an adversarial two-party dispute. In such cases, it

32
33

North Atlantic Treaty, Article 3, 63 stat. 2241, in UNTS, vol. 34, no. 541, 1949, p. 243.
Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes, ‘‘Compliance Without Enforcement: State
Behavior Under Regulatory Treaties,’’ Negotiation Journal 7 (July 1991), pp. 311–31. See
also Louis B. Sohn, ‘‘Peaceful Settlement of Disputes in Ocean Conflicts: Does UN Clause
3 Point the Way?’’ Law and Contemporary Problems 46 (Spring 1983), pp. 195–200.

On Compliance

79

remains open to a state, in the absence of bad faith, to maintain its
position and try to convince the others.
In many such disputes, a consensus may exist or emerge among
knowledgeable professionals about the legal rights and wrongs.34 In
many others, however, the issue will remain contestable. Although one
party may charge another with violation and deploy legions of international lawyers in its support, a detached observer often cannot readily
conclude that there is indeed a case of noncompliance. In fact, it can be
argued that if there is no authoritative arbiter (and even sometimes
when there is), discourse among the parties, often in the hearing of a
wider public audience, is an important way of clarifying the meaning of
the rules.
In the face of treaty norms that are indeterminate over a considerable
range, even conscientious legal advice may not avoid issues of compliance.
At the extreme, a state may consciously seek to discover the limits of its
obligation by testing its treaty partners’ responses.
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes said, ‘‘The very meaning of a line in the
law is that you intentionally may come as close to it as you can if you do
not pass it.’’35 Perhaps a more usual way of operating in the zone of
ambiguity is to design the activity to comply with the letter of the obligation, leaving others to argue about the spirit. The General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) prohibits a party from imposing quotas on
imports. When Japanese exports of steel to the United States generated
pressures from U.S. domestic producers that the Nixon administration
could no longer contain, U.S. trade lawyers invented the ‘‘voluntary
restraint agreement,’’ under which private Japanese producers agreed to
limit their U.S. sales.36 The United States imposed no official quota,
although the Japanese producers might well have anticipated some such
action had they not ‘‘volunteered.’’ Did the arrangement violate GATT
obligations?
Questions of compliance with treaty obligations ordinarily arise as
[incidental obstacles] to objectives that decisionmakers regard as important.37 Lawyers may be consulted or may intervene. Decisions about how
the desired program is to be carried out emerge from a complex interaction of legal and policy analysis that generates its own subrules and
34

35
36
37

Oscar Schachter, ‘‘The Invisible College of International Lawyers,’’ Northwestern
University Law Review, vol. 72, no. 2, 1977, pp. 217–26.
Superior Oil Co. v. Mississippi, 280 U.S. 390 (1920), p. 395.
Consumers Union v. Kissinger, 506 F. 2d 136 (D.C. Cir. 1974).
Chayes and Chayes, ‘‘Living Under a Treaty Regime,’’ pp. 197 and 200.

80

International Law and International Relations

precedents. The process parallels that in a classic U.S. bureaucracy or
corporation.
Even in the stark, high politics of the Cuban Missile Crisis, State Department lawyers argued that the United States could not lawfully react
unilaterally, since the Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba did not
amount to an ‘‘armed attack’’ sufficient to trigger the right of self-defense
in Article 51 of the UN Charter. Use of force in response to the missiles
would only be lawful if approved by the Organization of American States
(OAS). Though it would be foolish to contend that the legal position
determined President John Kennedy’s decision, there is little doubt that
the asserted need for advance OAS authorization for any use of force
contributed to the mosaic of argumentation that led to the decision to
respond initially by means of the quarantine rather than an air strike.
Robert Kennedy said later, ‘‘It was the vote of the Organization of
American States that gave a legal basis for the quarantine . . . and changed
our position from that of an outlaw acting in violation of international
law into a country acting in accordance with twenty allies legally protecting their position.’’38 This was the advice he had heard from his
lawyers, and it was a thoroughly defensible position. Nevertheless, many
international lawyers in the United States and elsewhere disagreed
because they thought the action was inconsistent with the UN Charter.39

capability
According to classical international law, legal rights and obligations run
among states and is an undertaking by them as to their future conduct.
The object of the agreement is to affect state behavior. This simple
relationship between agreement and relevant behavior continues to exist
for many treaties. The LTBT is such a treaty. It prohibits nuclear testing
in the atmosphere, in outer space, or underwater. Only states conduct
nuclear weapons tests, so only state behavior is implicated in the undertaking. The state, by governing its own actions, without more, determines
whether it will comply with the undertaking or not. Moreover, there is
no doubt about the state’s capacity to do what it has undertaken.
38

39

Robert Kennedy, Thirteen Days (New York: W. M. Norton, 1971), p. 99. See also Abram
Chayes ‘‘The Role of Law in the Cuban Missile Crisis.’’
See, for example, Quincy Wright, ‘‘The Cuban Quarantine,’’ American Journal of International Law 57 (July 1963), pp. 546–65; James S. Campbell, ‘‘The Cuban Crisis and the
UN Charter: An Analysis of the United States Position’’ Stanford Law Review 16 (December
1963), pp. 160–76; and William L. Standard, ‘‘The United States Quarantine of Cuba and
the Rule of Law,’’ American Bar Association Journal 49 (August 1963), pp. 744–48.

On Compliance

81

Every state, no matter how primitive its structure or limited its resources,
can refrain from conducting atmospheric nuclear tests.
Even when only state behavior is at stake, the issue of capacity may
arise when the treaty involves an affirmative obligation. In the 1980s it
was a fair assumption that the Soviet Union had the capability to carry
out its undertaking to destroy certain nuclear weapons as required by
the START agreement. In the 1990s, that assumption was threatened by
the emergence of a congeries of successor states in place of the Soviet
Union, many of which did not have the necessary technical knowledge
or material resources to do the job.40
The problem is pervasive in contemporary regulatory treaties. Much
of the work of the International Labor Organization (ILO) from the
beginning has been devoted to improving its members’ domestic labor
legislation and enforcement. The current spate of environmental agreements poses the difficulty in acute form. Such treaties formally are among
states, and the obligations are cast as state obligations for example, to
reduce sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions by 30 percent against a certain
baseline. However, the real object of such treaties is usually not to affect
state behavior but to regulate the behavior of nonstate actors carrying out
activities that produce SO2, using electricity, or gasoline. The ultimate
impact on the relevant private behavior depends on a complex series of
intermediate steps. It will normally require an implementing decree or
legislation followed by detailed administrative regulations. In essence, the
state will have to establish and enforce a full-blown domestic regime
designed to secure the necessary reduction in emissions.
The state may be ‘‘in compliance’’ when it has taken the formal legislative and administrative steps, and, despite the vagaries of legislative and
domestic politics, it is perhaps appropriate to hold it accountable for failure to do so. However, the construction of an effective domestic regulatory
apparatus is not a simple mechanical task. It entails choices and requires scientific and technical judgment, bureaucratic capability, and fiscal
resources. Even developed Western states have not been able to construct
such systems with confidence that they will achieve the desired objective.41
40

41

Kurt M. Campbell, Ashton B. Carter, Steven E. Miller, and Charles A. Zraket, Soviet
Nuclear Fission: Control of the Nuclear Arsenal in a Disintegrating Soviet Union, CSIA
Studies in International Security, no. 1. Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., November 1991, pp. 24, 25, and 108.
Kenneth Hanf, ‘‘Domesticating International Commitments: Linking National and International Decision-making,’’ prepared for a meeting entitled Managing Foreign Policy
Issues Under Conditions of Change, Helsinki, July 1992.

82

International Law and International Relations

Although there are surely differences among developing countries,
the characteristic situation is a severe dearth of the requisite scientific,
technical, bureaucratic, and financial wherewithal to build effective domestic enforcement systems. Four years after the Montreal Protocol was
signed, only about half the member states had complied fully with the
requirement of the treaty that they report annual chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) consumption.42 The Conference of the Parties promptly established an Ad Hoc Group of Experts on Reporting, which recognized that
the great majority of the nonreporting states were developing countries
that for the most part were simply unable to comply without technical
assistance from the treaty organization.43
The Montreal Protocol is the first treaty under which the parties undertake to provide significant financial assistance to defray the incremental costs of compliance for developing countries. The same issue
figured on a much larger scale in the negotiations for a global climate
change convention and in the UN Conference on Environment and
Development, held in Brazil in June 1992. The last word has surely not
been spoken in these forums, nor is the problem confined to environmental
agreements.

The Temporal Dimension
Significant changes in social or economic systems mandated by regulatory
treaty regimes44 take time to accomplish. Thus, a cross section at any
particular moment in time may give a misleading picture of the state of
compliance. Wise treaty drafters recognize at the negotiating stage that
42

43

44

See Report of the Secretariat on the Reporting of Data by the Parties in Accordance with
Article 7 of the Montreal Protocol, UNEP/OzL.Pro.3/5, 23 May 1991, pp. 6–12 and
22–24; and Addendum, UNEP/OzL.Pro3/5/Add.l, 19 June 1991.
For the establishment of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts, see Report of the Second Meeting
of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer,
UNEP/ OzL.Pro.2/3, Decision 2/9, 29 June 1990, p. 15. At its first meeting in December
1990, the Ad Hoc Group of Experts concluded that countries ‘‘lack knowledge and
technical expertise necessary to provide or collect’’ the relevant data and made a detailed
series of recommendations for addressing the problem. See Report of the First Meeting of
the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on the Reporting of Data, UNEP/OzL.Pro/WG.2/1/4,
7 December 1990.
The now-classical definition of an international regime appears in Krasner, ‘‘Structural
Causes and Regime Consequences,’’ p. 2: ‘‘Regimes are sets of implicit or explicit principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which actors’ expectations
converge in a given area of international relations.’’

On Compliance

83

there will be a considerable time lag after the treaty is concluded before
some or all of the parties can bring themselves into compliance. Thus
modern treaties, from the IMF Agreement in 1945 to the Montreal
Protocol in 1987, have provided for transitional arrangements and made
allowances for special circumstances.45 Nevertheless, whether or not the
treaty provides for it, a period of transition will be necessary.
Similarly, if the regime is to persist over time, adaptation to changing
conditions and underlying circumstances will require a shifting mix of
regulatory instruments to which state and individual behavior cannot
instantaneously respond. Often the original treaty is only the first in a series
of agreements addressed to the issue-area.
Activists in all fields lament that the treaty process tends to settle on
a least-common-denominator basis. But the drive for universality (or universal membership in the particular region of concern) may necessitate
accommodation to the response capability of states with large deficits
in financial, technical, or bureaucratic resources. A common solution is
to start with a low obligational ante and increase the level of regulation
as experience with the regime grows. The convention-protocol strategy
adopted in a number of contemporary environmental regimes exemplifies
this conception. The Vienna Convention on the Protection of the Ozone
Layer, signed in 1985, contained no substantive obligations but required
only that the parties ‘‘in accordance with the means at their disposal and
their capabilities’’ cooperate in research and information exchange and
in harmonizing domestic policies on activities likely to have an adverse
effect on the ozone layer.46 Two years later, as scientific consensus jelled
on the destructive effect of CFCs on the ozone layer, the Montreal Protocol was negotiated, providing for a 50 percent reduction from 1986
levels of CFC consumption by the year 2000.47 By June 1990, the parties
agreed to a complete phaseout.48
The pattern has a long pedigree, extending back to the ILO, the first
of the modern international regulatory agencies, whose members agreed
in 1921 only to ‘‘bring the recommendation[s] or draft convention[s]
[prepared by the organization] before the authority or authorities within
45

46

47
48

See Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, Article 14, in UNTS, vol.
2, 1945, p. 1501; and Montreal Protocol, Article 5.
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (signed 22 March 1985 and
entered into force 22 September 1988; hereafter cited as Vienna Ozone Convention),
Article 2(2), in International Legal Materials, vol. 26, 1986, p. 1529.
Montreal Protocol, Article 2(4).
London Amendments, Annex 1, Articles 2A(5) and 2B(3).

84

International Law and International Relations

whose competence the matter lies, for the enactment of legislation or other
action.49 The ILO then became the forum for drafting and propagating
a series of specific conventions and recommendations on the rights of
labor and conditions of employment for adoption by the parties.
The effort to protect human rights by international agreement may
be seen as an extreme case of time lag between undertaking and performance. Although the major human rights conventions have been widely
ratified, compliance leaves much to be desired. It is apparent that some
states adhered without any serious intention of abiding by them. But it is
also true that even parties committed to the treaties had different expectations about compliance than with most other regulatory treaties. Indeed,
the Helsinki Final Act, containing important human rights provisions
applicable to Eastern Europe, is by its terms not legally binding.50
Even so, it is a mistake to call these treaties merely ‘‘aspirational’’ or
‘‘hortatory.’’ To be sure, they embody ‘‘ideals’’ of the international system,
but like other regulatory treaties, they were designed to initiate a process
that over time, perhaps a long time, would bring behavior into greater
congruence with those ideals. These expectations have not been wholly
disappointed. The vast amount of public and private effort devoted to
enforcing these agreements evinces their obligational content.

acceptable levels of compliance
The foregoing section identified a range of matters that might be put
forward by the individual actor in defense or excuse of a particular instance of deviant conduct. From the perspective of the system as a whole,
however, the central issue is different. For a simple prohibitory norm like
a highway speed limit, it is in principle a simple matter to determine
whether any particular driver is in compliance. Yet most communities
and law enforcement organizations in the United States seem to be
perfectly comfortable with a situation in which the average speed on
interstate highways is perhaps ten miles above the limit. Even in individual cases, the enforcing officer is not likely to pursue a driver operating within that zone. The fundamental problem for the system is not
how to induce all drivers to obey the speed limit but how to contain

49

50

Constitution of the International Labor Organization, 11 April 1919, Article 405, 49
stat. 2722.
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, Final Act (1 August 1975), Article
10, in International Legal Materials, vol. 14, 1975, p. 1292.

On Compliance

85

deviance within acceptable levels. So, too, it is for international treaty
obligations.
‘‘An acceptable level of compliance’’ is not an invariant standard. The
matter is further complicated because many legal norms are not like the
speed limit that permits an on-off judgment as to whether an actor is in
compliance. As noted above, questions of compliance are often contestable and call for complex, subtle, and frequently subjective evaluation.
What is an acceptable level of compliance will shift according to the
type of treaty, the context, the exact behavior involved, and over time.
It would seem, for example, that the acceptable level of compliance
would vary with the significance and cost of the reliance that parties place
on the others’ performance.51 On this basis, treaties implicating national
security would demand strict compliance because the stakes are so high,
and to some extent that prediction is borne out by experience. Yet even in
this area, some departures seem to be tolerable.
In the case of the NPT, indications of deviant behavior by parties have
been dealt with severely. In the 1970s, U.S. pressures resulted in the
termination of programs to construct reprocessing facilities in South Korea
and Taiwan.52 Recently, a menu of even more stringent pressures was
mounted against North Korea, which signed an IAEA safeguard agreement and submitted to inspection [for a time].53 The inspection and
destruction requirements placed on Iraq under UN Security Council
resolution 687 [and the sanctions imposed for violation represent], an
extreme case of this severity toward deviation by NPT parties.
Although over 130 states are parties to the NPT, the treaty is not
universal, and some nonparties have acquired or are seeking nuclear
weapons capability.54 Despite these important holdouts, compliance
51

52

53

54

Charles Lipson, ‘‘Why Are Some International Agreements Informal,’’ International
Organization 45 (Autumn 1991), pp. 495–538.
See Joseph A. Yager, ‘‘The Republic of Korea,’’ and ‘‘Taiwan,’’ in Joseph A. Yager, ed.,
Nonproliferation and U.S. Foreign Policy (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
1980), pp. 44–65 and 66–81, respectively.
See David Sanger ‘‘North Korea Assembly Backs Atom Pact,’’ The New York Times, 10
April 1992, p. A3; and David Sanger, ‘‘North Korea Reveals Nuclear Sites to Atomic
Agency, The New York Times, 7 May 1992, p. A4. The initial U.S. response included
behind-the-scenes diplomatic pressure and encouraging supportive statements by concerned states at IAEA meetings. See L. Spector, Nuclear Ambitions: The Spread of
Nuclear Weapons, 1989–1990 (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1990), pp. 127–30.
Japan apparently has refused to consider economic assistance or investment in North
Korea until the nuclear issue is cleared up.
Countries that have not ratified the NPT include Argentina, Brazil, China, France, India,
Israel, and Pakistan. See Spector, Nuclear Ambitions, p. 430.

86

International Law and International Relations

with the NPT by the parties remains high. In fact, prominent nonparties
including Argentina, Brazil, and South Africa have either adhered to the
treaty or announced that they will comply with its norms.55 Although
there have been some significant departure from its norms and less than
universal acquiescence, the nonproliferation regime is surviving.
If national security regimes have not collapsed in the face of significant
perceived violation, it should be no surprise that economic and environmental treaties can tolerate a good deal of noncompliance. Such regimes
are in fact relatively forgiving of violations plausibly justified by extenuating circumstances in the foreign or domestic life of the offending state,
provided the action does not threaten the survival of the regime. As noted
above, a considerable amount of deviance from strict treaty norms may
be anticipated from the beginning and accepted, whether in the form of
transitional periods, special exemptions, limited substantive obligations,
or informal expectations of the parties.
The generally disappointing performance of states in fulfilling reporting requirements is consistent with this analysis.56 It is widely accepted
that failure to file reports reflects a low domestic priority or deficient
bureaucratic capacity in the reporting state. Since the reporting is not
central to the treaty bargain, the lapse can be viewed as ‘‘technical.’’
When, as in the Montreal Protocol, accurate reporting was essential to
the functioning of the regime, the parties and the secretariat made
strenuous efforts to overcome the deficiency, and with some success.57
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)
ordinarily displays some tolerance for noncompliance, but the alarming
and widely publicized decline in the elephant population in East African
habitats in the 1980s galvanized the treaty regime. The parties took
a decision to list the elephant in Appendix A of the treaty (shifting it from
Appendix B, where it had previously been listed), with the effect of banning all commercial trade in ivory. The treaty permits any party to enter
55

56

57

Reuters News Service, ‘‘Argentina and Brazil Sign Nuclear Accord,’’ The New York
Times, 14 December 1991, p. 7; ‘‘Brazil and Argentina: IAEA Safeguard Accord,’’ U.S.
Department of State Dispatch, 23 December 1991, p. 907; Reuters News Service, ‘‘South
Africa Signs a Treaty Allowing Nuclear Inspection,’’ The New York Times, 9 July 1991,
p. A11; and ‘‘Fact Sheet: Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty,’’ U.S. Department of State
Dispatch, 8 July 1991, p. 491.
U.S. General Accounting Office, International Environment: International Agreements
Are Not Well-Monitored, GAO, RCED-92–43, January 1992.
See Report of the Secretariat on the Reporting of Data by the Parties in Accordance with
Article 7 of the Montreal Protocol, UNEP/OzL.Pro.3/5, 23 May 1991, pp. 6–12 and
22–24; and Addendum, UNEP/OzL.Pro.3/5/Add.1, 19 June 1991.

On Compliance

87

a reservation to such an action, in which case the reserving party is not
bound by it. Nevertheless, through a variety of pressures, the United States
together with a group of European countries insisted on universal adherence to the ban, bringing such major traders as Japan and Hong Kong
to heel.58 The head of the Japanese Environment Agency supported the
Japanese move in order ‘‘to avoid isolation in the international community.’’59 It was freely suggested that Japan’s offer to host the next
meeting of the conference of parties, which was accepted on the last day
of the conference after Japan announced its changed position, would
have been rejected had it reserved on the ivory ban.
The meaning of the background assumption of general compliance is
that most states will continue to comply, even in the face of considerable
deviant behavior by other parties. In other words, the free-rider problem
has been overestimated. The treaty will not necessarily unravel in the face
of defections. As Mancur Olson recognized, if the benefits of the collective good to one or a group of parties outweigh the costs to them of providing the good, they will continue to bear the costs regardless of the
defections of others.60
It seems plausible that treaty regimes are subject to a kind of criticalmass phenomenon, so that once defection reaches a certain level, or in the
face of massive violation by a major player, the regime might collapse.61
Thus, either the particular character of a violation or the identity of the
violator may pose a threat to the regime and evoke a higher demand for
compliance. [Thus, in many of the situations in which the United States
58

59

60

61

For a report of Japan’s announcement of its intention not to enter a reservation on the
last day of the conference, see United Press International, ‘‘Tokyo Agrees to Join Ivory
Import Ban,’’ Boston Globe, 21 October 1989, p. 6. Japan stated that it was ‘‘respecting
the overwhelming sentiment of the international community.’’ As to Hong Kong, see
Jane Perlez, ‘‘Ivory Ban Said to Force Factories Shut,’’ The New York Times, 22 May
1990, p. A14. The Hong Kong reservation was not renewed after the initial six-month
period. Five African producer states with effective management programs did enter
reservations but agreed not to engage in trade until at least the next conference of the
parties. See Michael J. Glennon, ‘‘Has International Law Failed the Elephant,’’ American
Journal of International Law 84 (January 1990), pp. 1–43, especially p. 17. At the
1992 meeting they ended their opposition. See ‘‘Five African Nations Abandon Effort
to Resume Elephant Trade in CITES Talks,’’ Bureau of National Affairs Environment
Daily, electronic news service, 12 March 1992.
United Press International, ‘‘Tokyo Agrees to Join Ivory Import Ban,’’ Boston Globe, 21
October 1989.
Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1971), pp. 33–36.
For a discussion of critical-mass behavior models, see Thomas Schelling, Micromotives
and Macrobehavior (New York: Norton, 1978), pp. 91–110.

88

International Law and International Relations

accused the Soviet Union of egregious violations of the ABM Treaty, and
although nuclear security was involved,] the violations did not threaten
the basic treaty bargain. The United States responded with a significant
enforcement effort but did not itself destroy the basic bargain by
abrogating the treaty. In the CITES elephant case, involving relatively
peripheral national interests from the realist perspective, a reservation by
Japan would have threatened the collapse of the regime. A concerted and
energetic defense resulted.

determining the acceptable compliance level
If, as we argue above, the ‘‘acceptable level of compliance’’ is subject to
broad variance across regimes, times, and occasions, how is what is
‘‘acceptable’’ to be determined in any particular instance? The economists
have a straightforward answer: invest additional resources in enforcement (or other measures to induce compliance) up to the point at which
the value of the incremental benefit from an additional unit of compliance exactly equals the cost of the last unit of additional enforcement
resources.62 Unfortunately, the usefulness of this approach is limited by the
impossibility of quantifying or even approximating, let alone monetizing,
any of the relevant factors in the equation and markets are not normally
available to help.
In such circumstances, as Charles Lindblom has told us, the process by
which preferences are aggregated is necessarily a political one.63 It follows
that the choice whether to intensify (or slacken) the international enforcement effort is necessarily a political decision. It implicates all the
same interests pro and con that were involved in the initial formulation of
the treaty norm, as modified by intervening changes of circumstances.
Although the balance will to some degree reflect the expectations of
compliance that the parties entertained at that time, it is by no means
rare, in international as in domestic politics, to find that what the lawmaker has given in the form of substantive regulation is taken away in the
implementation. What is ‘‘acceptable’’ in terms of compliance will reflect
62

63

See Gary Becker, ‘‘Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,’’ Journal of Political Economy 76 (March/April 1968), pp. 169–217; and Stigler,’’ The Optimum Enforcement of Laws,’’ p. 526.
Charles E. Lindblom, Politics and Markets (New York: Basic Books, 1977), pp. 254–55.
At the domestic level, the decision whether to intensify enforcement of the treaty
implicates a similar political process, as the continuous debates in the United States over
GATT enforcement testify. Our work-in-progress includes a consideration of secondlevel enforcement.

On Compliance

89

the perspectives and interests of participants in the ongoing political
process rather than some external scientific or market-validated standard.
If the treaty establishes a formal organization, that body may serve as
a focus for mobilizing the political impetus for a higher level of compliance. A strong secretariat can sometimes exert compliance pressure, as in
the IMF or ILO. The organization may serve as a forum for continuing
negotiation among the parties about the level of compliance. An example
of these possibilities is the effort of the International Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) – and after 1982 its successor, the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) – to control pollution of the sea by tanker
discharges of oil mixed with ballast water.64 IMCO’s regulatory approach
was to impose performance standards limiting the amount of oil that
could be discharged on any voyage. From 1954, when the first oil pollution treaty was signed, until the 1978 revisions, there was continuous
dissatisfaction with the level of compliance. IMCO responded by imposing increasingly strict limits, but these produced only modest results
because of the difficulty of monitoring and verifying the amount of oil
discharged. Finally, in 1978 IMO adopted a new regulatory strategy and
imposed an equipment standard requiring all new tankers to have separate ballast tanks that physically prevent the intermixture of oil with
the discharged ballast water. The new requirement was costly to tanker
operators but easily monitored by shipping authorities. Compliance with
the equipment standard has been close to 100 percent, and discharge of
oil from the new ships is substantially nil. The sequence reflects the
changing configuration of political strength between domestic environmental and shipping constituencies in the members of IMO (and IMCO)
which was originally referred to as a ‘‘shipping industry club.’’
Again, after a considerable period of fruitless exhortation in the International Whaling Commission, Japan finally agreed to participate in a
temporary moratorium on whaling that had been proclaimed by the organization when the United States threatened trade sanctions under the
Marine Mammal Protection Act.65 The Japanese ban on ivory imports
shows a mixture of economic and reputational threats. The United States
64

65

Ronald Mitchell, ‘‘Intentional Oil Pollution of the Oceans: Crises, Public Pressure, and
Equipment Standards,’’ in Peter M. Haas, Robert O. Keohane, and Mark A. Levy, eds.,
Institutions for the Earth: Sources of Effective International Environmental Protection
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming).
See Steinar Andresen, ‘‘Science and Politics in the International Management of Whales,’’
Marine Policy, vol. 13, no. 2, 1989, p. 99; and Patricia Birnie, International Regulation
of Whaling (New York: Oceana, 1985).

90

International Law and International Relations

hinted at trade sanctions, and the conference of the parties of CITES
threatened not to schedule its next meeting in Kyoto if Japan remained
out of compliance.
If there are no objective standards by which to recognize an ‘‘acceptable level of compliance,’’ it may be possible at least to identify some
general types of situations that might actuate the deployment of political
power in the interest of greater compliance. First, states committed to
the treaty regime may sense that a tipping point is close, so that enhanced
compliance would be necessary for regime preservation. As noted above,
the actions against Japan on the ivory import ban may have been of this
character. After the high visibility given to the CITES moves to ban the
ivory trade, there would not have been much left of the regime if Japan
had been permitted to import with impunity.
Second, states committed to a level of compliance higher than that
acceptable to the generality of the parties may seek to ratchet up the
standard. The Netherlands often seems to play the role of ‘‘leader’’ in
European environmental affairs both in the North Sea and Baltic Sea
regimes and in LRTAP.66 Similarly, the United States may be a ‘‘leader’’ for
improving compliance with the NPT, where its position is far stronger
than that of its allies.
Finally, campaigning to improve a compliance level that states concerned would just as soon leave alone is a characteristic activity for NGOs,
especially in the fields of the environment and of human rights. NGOs
increasingly have direct access to the political process both within the
treaty organizations and in the societies of which they are a part. Their
technical, organizational, and lobbying skills are an independent resource
for enhanced compliance at both levels of the two-level game.

conclusion
The foregoing discussion reflects a view of noncompliance as a deviant
rather than an expected behavior, and as endemic rather than deliberate.
This in turn leads to de-emphasis of formal enforcement measures and
even, to a degree, of coercive informal sanctions, except in egregious
cases. It shifts attention to sources of noncompliance that can be managed by routine international political and managerial processes. Thus,
the improvement of dispute resolution procedures goes to the problem
66

See Peter M. Haas, ‘‘Protecting the Baltic and North Seas,’’ in Haas, Keohane, and Levy,
Institutions for the Earth.

On Compliance

91

of ambiguity; technical and financial assistance may help cure the capacity deficit; and transparency will make it likelier that, over time, national
policy decisions are brought increasingly into line with agreed international standards.
These approaches merge in the process of ‘‘jawboning’’ an effort to
persuade the miscreant to change its ways that is the characteristic form
of international enforcement activity. This process exploits the practical
necessity for the putative offender to give reasons and justifications for
suspect conduct. These reasons and justifications are reviewed and critiqued in a variety of venues, public and private, formal and informal. The
tendency is to winnow out reasonably justifiable or unintended failures to fulfill commitments that comport with a good-faith compliance standard and to identify and isolate the few cases of egregious and
willful violation. By systematically addressing and eliminating all mitigating circumstances that might possibly be advanced, this process can
ultimately demonstrate that what may at first have seemed like ambiguous conduct is a black-and-white case of deliberate violation. The offending state is left with a stark choice between conforming to the rule
as defined and applied in the particular circumstances or openly flouting
its obligation. This turns out to be a very uncomfortable position for
even a powerful state. One example is the now demonstrated Iraqi
retreat in showdowns with the UN-IAEA inspection teams.67
Enforcement through these interacting measures of assistance and
persuasion is less costly and intrusive and is certainly less dramatic than
coercive sanctions, the easy and usual policy elixir for noncompliance.
It has the further virtue that it is adapted to the needs and capacities of
the contemporary international system.
67

For an account of the Iraqi response, see Sean Cote, A Narrative of the Implementation
of Section C of UN Security Council Resolution 687.

5
Is the Good News About Compliance Good News
About Cooperation?
George W. Downs, David M. Rocke, and
Peter N. Barsoom

In the past few years many social scientists interested in cooperation have
turned their attention to the problem of compliance in international
regulatory regimes. Much of the empirical research in this area has been
conducted by a group composed mainly of qualitative political scientists
and scholars interested in international law.1 Its message is that (1)
compliance is generally quite good; (2) this high level of compliance
has been achieved with little attention to enforcement; (3) those compliance problems that do exist are best addressed as management rather
than enforcement problems; and (4) the management rather than the
enforcement approach holds the key to the evolution of future regulatory
cooperation in the international system. As Oran Young notes, ‘‘A new
understanding of the bases of compliance – one that treats compliance as
a management problem rather than an enforcement problem and that has
profound practical as well as theoretical implications – is making itself
felt among students of international relations.’’2 In short, not only are
the dreary expectations born of factors such as relative gains concerns,
collective action problems, anarchy, and fears of self-interested
1

2

For example, see Arora and Cason 1995; Chayes and Chayes 1990; 1991; 1993a; 1993b;
Duffy 1988; Haas, Keohane, and Levy 1993; Hawkins 1984; Mitchell 1993; 1994a;
1994b; 1995; Scholz 1984; Sparrow 1994; Young 1989; and 1994.
Young’s quotation is taken from the dust jacket of Mitchell 1994a.

An earlier version of this article was presented at the annual meeting of the International
Studies Association, Chicago, February 1994. The authors thank Abram Chayes, Robert
Keohane, Marc Levy, Ron Mitchell, Ken Oye, Michael Ross, the editor of International
Organization, and the anonymous referees for their helpful comments. The authors also
acknowledge the support of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation to the
Center of International Studies, Princeton University.

92

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

93

exploitation incorrect but also the enforcement limitations that always
have appeared to sharply bound the contributions of international law and
many international institutions now appear to have been exaggerated.
In this essay we will argue that the empirical findings of this group,
which we refer to as the ‘‘managerial’’school, are interesting and important
but that its policy inferences are dangerously contaminated by selection
problems. If we restrict our attention to those regulatory treaties that
prescribe reductions in a collectively dysfunctional behavior (e.g., tariffs,
arms increases), evidence suggests that the high level of compliance and
the marginality of enforcement result from the fact that most treaties require states to make only modest departures from what they would have
done in the absence of an agreement. This creates a situation where states
often are presented with negligible benefits for even unpunished defections; hence the amount of enforcement needed to maintain cooperation is
modest. Nothing is wrong with this situation in itself, but it is unlikely to
provide the model for the future that the managerialists claim. Even if we
assume that the absolute value of the benefits generated by this small
amount of regulation is relatively large, further progress in international
regulatory cooperation will almost certainly require the creation of
agreements that present far greater incentives to defect than those currently in place (e.g., more demanding environmental standards, fewer nontariff barriers, steeper arms reductions). We have precious little evidence
that such progress can be obtained in the absence of better enforcement.
After discussing the problems posed by endogeneity and selection, we
present the theoretical argument for linking enforcement level to what we call
‘‘depth of cooperation’’ and examine the extent to which deep cooperation
has been achieved without enforcement. We then present a number of prominent exceptions to the managerial school’s unqualified generalizations about
the causes and cures of noncompliance. Finally, we discuss the strategic
implications of the evolution of increasingly cooperative regimes.

the managerial thesis
The bedrock of the managerial school is the finding that state compliance
with international agreements is generally quite good and that enforcement has played little or no role in achieving and maintaining that record.
In Abram Chayes and Antonia Chayes’s words, what ensures compliance is not the threat of punishment but ‘‘a plastic process of interaction
among the parties concerned in which the effort is to reestablish, in the
microcontext of the particular dispute, the balance of advantage that

94

International Law and International Relations

brought the agreement into existence.’’3 For the members of the managerial school, ‘‘noncompliance is not necessarily, perhaps not even
usually, the result of deliberate defiance of the legal standard.’’4 On those
rare occasions when compliance problems do occur they should not be
viewed as violations or self-interested attempts at exploitation, but as
isolated administrative breakdowns. The causes of noncompliance are to
be found in (1) the ambiguity and indeterminacy of treaties, (2) the capacity limitations of states, and (3) uncontrollable social or economic changes.5
Not surprisingly, the managerial school takes a dim view of formal
and even informal enforcement measures. Punishment not only is inappropriate given the absence of any exploitative intent but it is too
costly, too political, and too coercive. As Ronald Mitchell notes, ‘‘Retaliatory non-compliance often proves unlikely because the costs of any
individual violation may not warrant a response and it cannot be specifically
targeted, imposing costs on those that have consistently complied without
hurting the targeted violator enough to change its behavior.’’6 As a result,
according to Young, ‘‘arrangements featuring enforcement as a means of
eliciting compliance are not of much use in international society.’’7 Since
sanctions usually are more successful against economically vulnerable
and politically weak countries and ‘‘unilateral sanctions can be imposed
only by the major powers, their legitimacy as a device for treaty
enforcement is deeply suspect,’’ as Chayes and Chayes point out.8 ***
Instances of apparent noncompliance are problems to be solved, rather
than violations that have to be punished. According to Chayes and Chayes,
‘‘As in other managerial situations, the dominant atmosphere is that of
actors engaged in a cooperative venture, in which performance that seems
for some reason unsatisfactory represents a problem to be solved by mutual
consultation and analysis, rather than an offense to be punished. Persuasion and argument are the principal motors of this process.’’9 The
strategies necessary to induce compliance and maintain cooperation
involve: (1) improving dispute resolution procedures, (2) technical and
financial assistance, and (3) increasing transparency. The last is especially
important: ‘‘For a party deliberately contemplating violation, the high
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Chayes and Chayes 1991, 303.
Ibid., 301.
Chayes and Chayes 1993b, 188.
Mitchell 1993, 330.
Young 1994, 74 and 134.
Chayes and Chayes 1993a, 29.
Chayes and Chayes 1991, 303.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

95

probability of discovery reduces the expected benefits rather than increasing the costs and would thus deter violation regardless of the
prospect of sanctions.’’10

the endogeneity and selection problems
It is not difficult to appreciate why the findings of the managerial school
suggest that both international institutions and even international law
have a far brighter future than most international relations specialists have
believed for the past fifty years. Apart from sharply contradicting the
pessimistic expectations of many realists and neorealists about the inability of cooperation and self-regulation to flourish in an anarchic world,
they also run counter to the claims of cooperation researchers in the
rational-choice tradition. Such researchers emphasize the centrality of
enforcement concerns in regulatory environments and characterize them
as mixed-motive games, where the danger of self-interested exploitation is
significant, as opposed to coordination games, where it is not.11 Such
findings certainly add credibility to the frequent speculation that the
rational-choice tradition’s affection for the repeated prisoners’ dilemma
has led it to overemphasize enforcement and underemphasize the potential for voluntary compliance and noncoercive dispute resolution.
* * *
To even begin to overcome the problems that endogeneity poses for
understanding the role of enforcement in regulatory compliance, we need
to control for the basis of state selection; that is, those characteristics of
international agreements that play the same role for states as musical
difficulty does for the school orchestras. One likely candidate is what we
have termed the depth of cooperation. International political economists
define the depth of an agreement by the extent to which it requires behindthe-border integration with regard to social and environmental standards
as well as with regard to the reduction of barriers to trade. Here, however,
the depth of an agreement refers to the extent to which it captures the
collective benefits that are available through perfect cooperation in one
particular policy area. Given the difficulties involved in identifying the
cooperative potential of an ideal treaty, it is most useful to think of
10
11

Chayes and Chayes 1993a, 18.
See, for example, Abreu 1988; Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti 1986; 1989; Bayard and
Elliott 1994; Downs and Rocke 1995; Hungerford 1991; Martin 1992; Staiger 1995;
and Sykes 1990.

96

International Law and International Relations

a treaty’s depth of cooperation as the extent to which it requires states to
depart from what they would have done in its absence. If we are examining the critical subset of regulatory treaties that require states to reduce
some collectively dysfunctional behavior like tariffs or pollution, a treaty’s
theoretical depth of cooperation would refer to the reduction it required
relative to a counterfactual estimate of the tariff or pollution level that
would exist in the absence of a treaty. Of course, the depth of cooperation
that a treaty actually achieved might be quite different than this figure.
Here we measure depth of cooperation by the treaty level because that
is the figure which serves as the basis for judging the level of compliance. In
the absence of a trustworthy theoretical estimate of this counterfactual,
it could be based on the status quo at the time an agreement was signed or
on a prediction derived from the year-to-year change rate prior to that time.
Either estimate of depth of cooperation is obviously quite crude. There
are doubtless policy areas in which, for any number of reasons, the
potential for cooperation is much smaller than others. In such cases our
depth measure will make cooperation in these areas appear shallower
than it really is. Yet if one is willing to concede, as both managerialists
and more conventional institutionalists argue, that there are substantial
cooperative benefits that are as yet unrealized in the areas of arms control,
trade, and environmental regulation, this depth of cooperation measure
provides a rough idea of what states have accomplished. We can in turn
use it to interpret compliance data and help assess the role of enforcement.
While this measure of depth is hardly perfect, there is no reason to expect
that it is biased in such a way as to distort the relationship between the
depth of cooperation represented by a given treaty, the nature of the game
that underlies it, and the amount of enforcement needed to maintain it.
Depth of cooperation is important to track because just as the role
of enforcement differs in mixed-motive and coordination games, it also
varies within mixed-motive games according to depth. To appreciate the
connection, consider the following model. States A and B are playing a
repeated bilateral trade game in which each state in each period chooses
a level of protection P 2 [0, ‘) that influences the level of trade. The utility
of state A is denoted as UA(PA,PB), and the utility of state B is denoted
as UB(PA,PB). We do not specify the functional form of these utilities but
instead adopt a series of plausible assumptions detailed in Appendix A.12
12

These assumptions also contain conditions on the response functions RA(PB) and RB(PA),
which denote the optimal single-period response of one state to a particular level of
protection (e.g., tariff) chosen by the other state.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

97

We will adopt the convention of representing the trade game as a
prisoners’ dilemma. While some have argued that this pattern of incentives emerges from a variety of plausible circumstances, we assume it
has emerged from electoral and financial incentives provided by interest
groups working to protect domestic products from foreign competition.13 If we consider only two particular levels of tariffs PA , P0A
and PB , P0B, then the four outcomes represented by each side choosing
P or P0 form a payoff matrix of the prisoners’ dilemma type. In this case,
each side prefers higher tariffs regardless of the choice of the other side,
but both sides prefer mutual cooperation to mutual defection. Unlike the
repeated prisoners’ dilemma, the choices defined by the present model
are continuous rather than discrete. Treaties can be set at any level below
the noncooperative tariff rates. Cheating can be limited or flagrant.
And punishments can range from a barely perceptible increase in tariffs
that lasts for one period to a multiple of current tariffs that lasts
indefinitely.
Under the assumptions of our model, if tariff levels are high, both states
have an opportunity to benefit by devising an agreement to lower them.
Nevertheless, there is an incentive to exploit the other party’s trust; that is,
A’s optimal one-period response to side B’s cooperative tariff level will
always be to raise tariffs. Self-interest will prevent such cheating only
if the consequences of cheating are greater than the benefits. To achieve
a situation where this disincentive exists, states must resort to a punishment for defection. In this case, one punishment strategy prescribes
that state A begin by observing the treaty, but if B violates it, even modestly, state A should respond by abrogating the agreement (or otherwise
reducing its level of compliance) for some specified period of time.
During cooperative periods each side’s tariff is supposed to be limited
 A , P0A and P
 B , P0B, while in the punishment periods both sides
to P
raise tariffs to some noncooperative level. The most extreme punishment strategy, often called the ‘‘grim strategy,’’ occurs when the response
to any violation is permanent reversion to the noncooperative Nash
equilibrium. A punishment strategy is sufficient to enforce a treaty when
each side knows that if it cheats it will suffer enough from the punishment that the net benefit will not be positive.
To make this more concrete, consider an example where the noncooperative tariff is at a level of 100 percent for each side, and plausible
13

For the former argument, see Staiger 1995, 27. For the latter, see Grossman and Helpman
1994.

98

International Law and International Relations

treaties would provide for symmetric reductions in tariffs for each
side.14 Figure 5.1 compares the one-period utility of both sides observing
the treaty with the temptation to defect. The temptation to cheat in
this model rises rapidly with the cooperativeness of the treaty, while the
treaty benefits rise less rapidly. This is what imposes a limit on which
treaties can be supported. Figure 5.2 shows the punishment periods necessary to support treaties of various sizes. A shorter period would make
the treaty vulnerable to cheating because it would be insufficient to
remove all of the gains from violating the treaty. For example, a treaty
that specifies a 5 percent reduction in tariffs only requires a punishment
of two periods; the best treaty that can be supported with the maximal punishment of infinite duration is 37.19 percent. The increase in
the ratio of the benefit of cheating to the benefit of cooperating means
that increasingly severe punishments are necessary to deter defection –
here severity means length of punishment – as the benefits of the treaty
and corresponding restrictiveness of its requirements increase. Although
the rate of increase in utility with the increase in punishment length
decreases, the utility obtainable by very long punishments is still many
times that of the utility obtainable with punishment lengths of one or
two periods. The essential point the graph demonstrates is the deeper
the agreement is, the greater the punishments required to support it.
The only relevant criterion is that punishment must hurt the transgressor state at least as much as that state could gain by the violation. This
does not imply that, say, a certain amount of trade restriction should be
punished by an equal trade restriction (tit-for-tat); nor does it mean that
the transgressor be punished at least as much as the transgressor’s violation hurt the other party. Although both of these standards possess aspects of fairness, neither is relevant to supporting the treaty equilibrium.
Fairness and justice must take a back seat to the correct disincentive.
The specific mechanism by which states punish violations is less relevant
to the relationship between depth of cooperation and enforcement than is
the magnitude of enforcement. Although we motivate the model by using
a case of centralized enforcement for convenience, nothing in the analysis
precludes effective decentralized enforcement schemes. Enforcement can
occur through linkages, as in the case of the Soviet Union and United
States during the Kissinger years; through formal institutions such as the
14

Of course, in the multiperiod model, the feasibility of maintaining this treaty depends
on the discount factor, d, as well as on the previous parameters. In this case, we use
a discount factor of d = .95, corresponding to an interest rate of 5 percent.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?
1,000

99

Treaty utility
Utility from defection

800

600

Utility
400

200

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Percentage reduction in tariffs
figure 5.1. One-period utility of treaty compliance versus defection.

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Dispute Settlement
Procedure; through unilateral actions, as in the U.S. enforcement of fishery and wildlife agreements under the Pelly and Packwood–Magnuson
amendments; or by domestic law as in the European Union and environmental treaties. Given the weakness of current international institutions
and the relative difficulty in mobilizing formal sanctions, we suspect – like
the majority of managerialists – that the most effective enforcement
schemes may well be decentralized and not involve perfectly coordinated
action by every signatory of a multilateral agreement.15 This, however,
does not negate the connection between depth of cooperation and the
magnitude of the punishment necessary to maintain compliance in mixedmotive games.

discussion
This logical connection between the depth of cooperation represented
by a given treaty and the amount of enforcement that is needed in
mixed-motive games suggests that evaluating the importance of enforcement by examining how high compliance is when it is low or absent might
15

On the role of decentralized enforcement schemes, see Ostrom 1990; and Kandori 1992.

100

International Law and International Relations
70
60
50

Punishment
period

40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Percentage reduction in tariffs
figure 5.2. Punishment required to support treaties of various sizes

be misleading. We need to worry about the possibility that both the high
rate of compliance and relative absence of enforcement threats are due
not so much to the irrelevance of enforcement as to the fact that states
are avoiding deep cooperation – and the benefits it holds whenever a
prisoners’ dilemma situation exists – because they are unwilling or unable
to pay the costs of enforcement. If this were true, prescribing that states
ignore enforcement in favor of other compliance strategies would be
equivalent to telling the school orchestras to avoid wasting their time
rehearsing. Just as the latter would condemn the orchestras to a repertoire
of simple compositions, the prescriptions of the managerial school would
condemn states to making agreements that represent solutions to coordination games and shallow prisoners’ dilemmas.
* * *
Given the circumstances, it seems advisable to sidestep any attempt to
inventory the nature of the underlying game and to evaluate some of the
implications of the rival theories. We examine two. First, we will assess
the depth of cooperation and the level of enforcement connected with
prominent regulatory agreements that involve the reduction of behaviors
that states have concluded are collectively counterproductive but that

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

101

contain few enforcement provisions. Ideally, one would like to examine
the correlation between enforcement and depth of cooperation, but as we
noted above, we agree with the managerial school’s observation that
such strongly enforced regulatory agreements are relatively rare. If the
managerial school is correct, the absence of strong enforcement provisions or the informal threat of enforcement should have no bearing on
the depth of cooperation. There should be numerous examples of states
agreeing to alter dramatically the trajectory that they were following at
the time a treaty was signed while paying little attention to enforcement.
If the game theorists are correct that most important regulatory agreements are mixed-motive games of some variety, any tendency of states to
avoid committing themselves to punishing noncompliance is likely to be
associated with either a world in which there are relatively few deeply
cooperative agreements or in which violations run rampant. Since we
agree that while regulatory violations exist they are not frequent, we
expect the former to be true.
Second, we will examine the managerial school’s claim that self-interest
rarely plays a conspicuous role in the treaty violations that do take place
and that violations are driven instead solely by a combination of the ambiguity of treaties, the capacity limitations of states, and uncontrollable
social and economic changes. We are skeptical of this assertion because
the set of violations should be less distorted by selection than the set of
treaties. This is true because we expect that, ceteris paribus, the rate of violation connected with mixed-motive game treaties should in the absence
of perfect information and appropriate enforcement be much higher than
the rate of violation connected with coordination game treaties. Hence,
even if there are fewer such treaties they would be overrepresented relative
to coordination game-based treaties in any sample of violations.
The Rarity of Deep Cooperation
Are we correct in our suspicion that inferences about the importance of
enforcement are likely to be contaminated by selection? That is, does evidence show that there is little need for enforcement because there is little
deep cooperation? Let us begin by considering the set of arms agreements
that the United States has made since 1945 (see appendix B). We note at
the outset that, however valuable, a number of the treaties such as the
‘‘Hot Line’’ agreement and the United States–Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreements do not directly regulate an arms output such as the number and/or location of a

102

International Law and International Relations

weapons system. Of those that do, a significant subset such as the Outer
Space Treaty, the Seabed Arms Control Treaty, and the Antarctic Treaty
involve agreements to maintain the status quo trajectory rather than to
alter it significantly. At the time the treaties were signed, neither the
Soviet Union nor the United States had cost-effective plans for major
weapons systems in these areas or possessed a strategic mission for which
such a system was believed necessary. The fact that this situation has
basically continued is the reason Chayes and Chayes can report that
‘‘there has been no repotted deviation from the requirements of these
treaties over a period of four decades.’’16 That there was more enforcement in this case than officially is embodied in these agreements might
also play a role. Both the Soviet Union and the United States likely knew
that if one broke an agreement in a dramatic fashion, the other probably
would retaliate in kind. Even though these expectations were established
tacitly, they are no less real than expectations described formally in the
treaty.17 While we are not denying that obtaining tangible reassurance of
a rival’s intentions through a treaty is valuable, it is difficult to argue
that these treaties exhibit the deep cooperation that would have taken
place if the superpowers had each agreed to terminate major modernization programs or dramatically reduce their defense budgets. Much the
same argument can be made in connection with the Anti-Ballistic Missiles
(ABM) Treaty. While the treaty may have provided a significant benchmark that helped prevent both states from exploiting the technological
gains that were made during the period since the treaty was signed,
neither side had the technology or the budget to deploy a major system
when the treaty was signed in 1972. In 1967 when President Johnson
and Premier Kosygin first began to move toward discussion, Soviet ABM
efforts were limited to a spare system around Moscow and the United
States announced that it would begin deployment of a ‘‘thin’’ system to
guard against Chinese attack and possible accidental launches.18 As the
technology of these antiballistic systems gradually has advanced and
attention has shifted away from defense against a terrorist state, the
depth of the original agreement in terms of today’s ‘‘counterfactual’’ (i.e.,
the ABM system that the United States would construct today in the
absence of an agreement) probably has increased. Given a constant or
decreasing level of enforcement because of the weakness of the former
16
17
18

Chayes and Chayes 1993a, chap. 7, p. 9.
Downs and Rocke 1990.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 1990, 150.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

103

Soviet Union and increasing depth, the game theorist would expect the
agreement to come under increasing pressure in the form of violations
on the part of the most powerful state. This appears to have occurred.
Neither the initial Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) Interim
Agreement nor SALT II was characterized by much depth. The interim
agreement froze the number of intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
launchers at the status quo level (the United States had none under
construction at the time and the Soviet Union was permitted to complete those it was building), but it allowed increases in the number of
submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) on both sides and failed
significantly to restrict qualitative improvements in launchers, missiles, or
a host of systems that allowed both sides to increase their nuclear capabilities.19 SALT II required significant reductions in each side’s number of operational launchers or bombers but permitted the number of
ICBMs equipped with multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles
(MIRVed ICBMs) to increase by 40 percent between the time of signing
and 1985. When this figure is added to the number of cruise missiles
permitted each bomber, the total number of nuclear weapons was
allowed to increase 50–70 percent. As Jozef Goldblat notes, ‘‘There is
a remarkable compatibility between the Treaty limitations and the projected strategic nuclear weapons programs of both sides.’’20
Intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF), conventional forces in Europe
(CFE), and the strategic arms reduction talks (START) agreements are
deeper, of course. The first prescribes the elimination of intermediate- and
shorter-range missiles in Europe; the second dramatically reduced conventional forces; and the third cuts the arsenals of strategic nuclear delivery
vehicles that come under the agreement by about 30 percent and cuts
warheads by 40 percent.21 While one can argue in connection with
START that the number of accountable weapons is smaller than the
actual number of weapons, the cuts are significant in terms of either the
status quo at the time of signing and each state’s trajectory. Do these
suggest that deep agreements that make no provisions for enforcement
play an important role in arms control?
There is no easy answer. On the one hand, we are inclined to simply
include these agreements in the set of deep regulatory agreements that
seem to require little enforcement. We do not claim that such agreements
19
20
21

Ibid., 168.
Goldblat 1993, 35.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 1991.

104

International Law and International Relations

do not exist – they clearly do – simply that many important prospective
agreements require enforcement. Yet, it is not clear that these agreements
are as deep as they appear to be. After all, the counterfactual – whether
estimated on the basis of the status quo or the trajectory of year-to-year
differences in arms production – represents the behavior of a political system that no longer exists. No one would gauge the depth of cooperation represented by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
by comparing German behavior during wartime with German behavior
after the war.
Managerialists might respond to this analysis by arguing that there
are good reasons for believing that the connection between enforcement
and depth of cooperation in the areas of international trade and the
environment is different from that connection in security. Not only are
many of the actors obviously different but security historically has been
dominated by the realist logic that managerialists find so inadequate. We
are not unsympathetic to this argument. The dynamics of cooperation
may indeed differ across policy areas, just as they may vary within the
same policy area over time. Nonetheless, at least with respect to the relationship between enforcement and depth of cooperation, the areas are
not as different as one might imagine or as some might hope.
* * *
Perhaps the best test of the relationship between the depth of cooperation and enforcement can be found when we examine the history
of a specific policy area in which regulations have become increasingly strict
over time. The game theorist would predict that as regulatory rules tighten,
the magnitude of the punishment needed to deter defection would also have
to increase. Even if the system achieves some dynamic equilibrium, there
should be some tangible sign of this under imperfect information.
If we discount the events that occurred in arms control after the downfall of the Soviet empire, the best examples of steadily increasing depth
of cooperation are to be found in the areas of trade and European
integration. In each case the role of enforcement has increased accordingly. Thomas Bayard and Kimberly Elliott, for example, conclude that
the Uruguay Round has ‘‘substantially reduced many of the most egregious trade barriers around the world,’’ but they also emphasize the enhanced ability of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to respond to
and punish trade violations.22 The WTO’s procedures for dealing with
22

The quotation is from Bayard and Elliott 1994, 336.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

105

violations are now more automatic and less manipulable by individual
parties. Time limits on the establishment of panels have now been set
to nine months with the conclusion of panels within eighteen months,
eliminating the inexorable delays under GATT. The principle of consensus voting in the adoption of panel reports has been reversed; previously,
both parties to a dispute had an automatic veto on panel recommendations and retaliation. The new system provides for automatic adoption of
panel reports, including approval for retaliation, unless a unanimous
consensus rejects it. Previously, sanctions were utilized only once in
GATT’s history. Now, retaliation will be authorized automatically in the
absence of a withdrawal of the offending practice or compensation to the
defendant. We believe that the negotiating history of the WTO demonstrates that the more demanding levels of cooperation achieved by the
Uruguay Round would not have been possible without its having reduced
the likelihood of self-interested exploitation by member states.
* * *
The Causes and Cures of Noncompliance
The principal goal of the managerial school’s investigation of compliance
is to design more effective strategies for overcoming compliance problems in regulatory regimes. It is thus useful to shift our attention away
from the likelihood of selection and the relationship between depth of
cooperation and enforcement to why those compliance problems that do
exist have occurred and how they might be remedied.
* * *
As the centerpiece of a sometimes problematic postwar trade regime,
the GATT provides researchers with a wealth of material about the
sources of noncompliance and the ability of its signatories to deal with
them. Typical examples of GATT violations include EC payments and
subsidies to oilseed producers, U.S. quantitative restrictions on sugar,
Japanese import restrictions on beef and citrus, and Canadian export
restrictions on unprocessed salmon and herring.23 This is just a sample
of the long list of commonly employed discriminatory techniques states
have used to satisfy protectionist political elements in contravention of
the GATT’s rules and norms.
23

See, respectively, Hudec 1993, 559 and 568; Bayard and Elliott 1994, 233; and Hudec
1993, 217–19.

106

International Law and International Relations

Ambiguity about what constitutes noncompliance is a source of some
of these problems, but no one denies a considerable number of violations
indeed has occurred. The framers of the GATT were careful not to limit
its policing or dispute settlement procedures to actions that were prohibited explicitly. Instead, they based enforcement provisions on the
nullification or impairment of benefits that countries might expect. Indeed,
Article 23 permits that settlement procedures be initiated:
If any contracting patty should consider that any benefit accruing to it directly
or indirectly under this agreement is being nullified or impaired or that the
attainment of any objective of the agreement is being impeded as the result of
(a) the failure of another contracting party to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement, or (b) the application by another contracting party of any measure,
whether or not it conflicts with the provisions of this Agreement, or (c) the
existence of any other situation.24

Although variation in expectations doubtless exists, few parties – including the states responsible – have argued that the EC subsidies of
wheat flour or pasta or the Multifiber Agreement, which clearly violated
the most-favored nation (MFN) principle, were based on confusion about
the expectations of other trading partners.
Capacity limitations and uncontrollable social and economic changes
rarely are cited as major determinants of violations. This is not so much
because they are never present but because their effect is dwarfed by
the most conspicuous cause of GATT noncompliance: the demands of
domestic interest groups and the significant political benefits often
associated with protection. Though GATT supporters would argue that
any ill effects have been overshadowed by the GATT’s positive achievement of reducing tariffs, the demand for protection is not being entirely
ignored.
If the managerialists are wrong about the source of the GATT’s
problems, are they correct about the steps that appear to have reduced
the rate of violations? The GATT provides a better laboratory for evaluating the managerialist claims about how compliance can best be improved than the Washington Treaty because unlike the latter, the GATT
has evolved. Dispute resolution in the form of GATT panels undoubtedly
has played some role, but certainly not an overwhelming one. Until
recently, the panels moved at a ponderous pace and could easily be
frustrated, especially by large states.25 Far more successful have been
24
25

The article is quoted in Bhagwati 1990, 105–6.
Bayard and Elliott 1994, chaps. 3 and 4.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

107

the rounds of multilateral negotiations that have operated over time to
ensure that certain categories of disputes would reappear less often and
that have extended the boundaries of the regime.
Nevertheless, enforcement also has played an important, if controversial, role in the operation and evolution of the GATT. Between 1974
and 1994, the United States imposed or publicly threatened retaliation
in 50 percent of the cases that it took to the GATT. It did so independent
of any GATT action and indeed even in five cases that Bayard and
Elliott believe would have fallen under GATT jurisdiction.26 Observers
such as Robert Hudec credit increased enforcement and such ‘‘justified
disobedience’’ of the GATT’s dispute resolution process with being
an important element in the process of GATT legal reform.27 Others,
like Alan Sykes, credit Section 301 and Super 301 unilateralism with
having inspired – ironically given the claims of the managerial school –
the enhanced dispute settlement procedures of the WTO.28 As Bayard
and Elliott conclude in their recent study, the ‘‘USTR [U.S. Trade
Representative] generally wielded the Section 301 crowbar deftly and
constructively, employing an aggressive unilateral strategy to induce
support abroad for strengthening of the multilateral trade system.’’29
Even in the case of environmental regimes, the source of many of the
managerialist examples, enforcement plays a greater role in successes
than one is led to believe and its absence is conspicuous in some notable
failures. For example, until very recently compliance with the weakly
enforced agreements issued under eleven international fisheries commissions was highly problematic. Agreement ambiguity and social and economic changes were not a major source of these compliance problems.
State capacity was more relevant since monitoring catches is costly, but
scholars agree that the developed states that were often the principal
violators could have coped with the monitoring issue if they believed it
was in their interest to do so. The crux of the problem was the paradox
of collective action: states saw little reason to pressure their fishermen
to obey rules that other states were likely to flout.30 The creation of the
200-mile exclusive economic zones was a dramatic improvement because it made enforcement much easier. Consequently, the role of enforcement is growing. For instance, in April 1995 a long-simmering
26
27
28
29
30

Ibid., 70.
Hudec 1990, 116.
Sykes 1992.
Bayard and Elliott 1994, 350.
Peterson 1993, 280.

108

International Law and International Relations

dispute over fishing rights in the North Atlantic among Canada, the EC,
and the United States was resolved by an agreement that the New York
Times reported, ‘‘could serve as a model for preserving endangered fish
stocks throughout the world.’’ The key to the accord, says the article, is
‘‘enforcement.’’ The deal provides for elaborate verification measures and
‘‘imposes stiff fines and other penalties for violations.’’31 The elaborate
verification measures testify to the importance of transparency, but to
believe that they would be effective in the absence of sanctions is naive.
The benefits of cheating are too great to be offset by transparency alone.
The cost of ignoring the connection between enforcement and compliance when there is a substantial incentive to defect is well-illustrated
by the Mediterranean Plan, considered by many to be an example of
how epistemic communities have been able to play a significant role in
effecting international cooperation. The Mediterranean Plan achieved
consensus by eliminating any meaningful restrictions on dumping and providing no enforcement mechanism for those minimal targets and restrictions
that were agreed to. As a result, it has been an embarrassing failure. Pollution
has increased, dolphin hunting continues, and despite a European Union ban
on drift nets longer than 2.5 kilometers, the rules are widely flouted.32 The
result has been a collapsing ecosystem in the Mediterranean.
The complementary relationship between transparency and enforcement is exemplified by a case that the managerialists believe to be an
archetype of their approach. The case, described by Mitchell, involves
the attempt by the International Maritime Consultative Organization
(IMCO) and its successor, the International Maritime Organization
(IMO), to regulate intentional oil pollution by oil tankers. From 1954
until 1978, the regime had little success and oil discharges were over
three to thirty times the legal limit.33 In 1978 the IMO switched strategies
and with the negotiation of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) began to regulate oil pollution by requiring tankers to be equipped with segregated ballast
tanks (SBT). Despite the reduced cargo capacity and increased costs of
equipping new and old oil tankers with the new equipment, and ‘‘despite
strong incentives not to install SBT, tanker owners have done so as
required. . . . Compliance is almost perfect.’’34

31
32
33
34

New York Times, 17 April 1995, A2.
‘‘Dead in the Water,’’ New Scientist, 4 February 1995.
Mitchell 1994b, 439 in particular.
Mitchell 1994a, 291.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

109

Why was the equipment regime so much more effective at inducing
compliance? It is not difficult to argue that increased enforcement was
anything but irrelevant. We learn for example, that ‘‘the [equipment violations regime] provided the foundation for a noncompliance response
system involving far more potent sanctions than those available for
discharge violations.’’35 Statements such as these suggest that while
increased transparency was critical to the success of MARPOL, it was
also critical that tankers lacking the International Oil Pollution Prevention (IOPP) certificate could be barred from doing business or
detained in port.
The huge opportunity costs of having a ship barred from port or detained would
force a tanker owner to think twice. . . . A single day of detention cost a tanker
operator some $20,000 in opportunity costs, far higher than typical fines being
imposed. . . . Detention provisions have altered behavior because they have had
the virtue of imposing . . . high costs on the violator, making their use more
credible and more potent . . . detention is a large enough penalty to deter a ship
from committing future violations.36

enforcement and the future of cooperation
The significance of the cases discussed above lies not in their representing typical cases of noncompliance but in their salience and role as
counterexamples to the unqualified prescriptions of the managerial
theory. They should also make us skeptical of any contention that
mixed-motive game-based cooperation (with its incentive for one or both
sides to defect if they can get away with it) plays only an insignificant
role in regulatory regimes. If some persistently have underestimated the
value of interstate coordination vis-a`-vis the solution of mixed-motive
games, others should not commit the opposite error of pretending that
the latter – and enforcement – is irrelevant. This is especially true in light
of the likely evolution of regulatory cooperation.
Cooperation in arms, trade, and environmental regulation may begin
with agreements that require little enforcement, but continued progress
seems likely to depend on coping with an environment where defection
presents significant benefits. It is not appropriate to counter skepticism
about the success of treaties that require steep cuts in nontariff barriers,
arms, or air pollution but that contain no enforcement provision with
35
36

Ibid., 289.
Ibid., 266 and 182–85.

110

International Law and International Relations

statistics about the average rate of compliance with international agreements that require states to depart only slightly from what they would
have done in the absence of an agreement. Techniques used to ensure
compliance with an agreement covering interstate bank transfers cannot
be counted on to ensure the success of the WTO’s new rules governing
intellectual property.
* * *
We do not mean to imply that the managerial model and the failure to
embrace the idea that enforcement is often necessary are the only things
preventing deeper cooperation. Obviously, states have reasons to refrain
from vigorous enforcement. The question is whether it is better to cope
with such reluctance by declaring that its importance has been vastly
exaggerated or by trying to remedy matters.
We obviously prefer the second course of action, and we believe that the
managerialists’ vision of cooperation and compliance distracts political
scientists from a host of problems that lie squarely within their area of
expertise. For example, the vast majority of political economists would
argue that the reason the GATT has encountered compliance problems
and the reason why states have not obtained the cooperative benefits
that would be possible through the use of more aggressive enforcement
strategies involves an agency problem. Political leaders, if not the consumers who make up their constituencies, are left better off if they acquiesce to protectionist demands during those periods (e.g., recessions,
following a technological breakthrough by foreign competition) when
interest groups are likely to pay a premium that is greater than the electoral
punishment they are likely to receive. Because the timing of such events is
uncertain and most leaders are similarly vulnerable to such events, they
deal with this situation by creating penalties for violations that are high
enough to prevent constant defection but low enough to allow selfinterested defection when circumstances demand it. Even leaders of states
that are, for whatever reason, more committed to free trade are reluctant
to increase the penalty for violations to a very high level because they suspect (probably correctly) that the ‘‘protectionist premium’’ is at times far
greater than the cost of any credible punishment for violations. Thus, their
hand is stayed not by any appreciation for the accidental nature of
defection but by an appreciation for just how unaccidental it is.37

37

Downs and Rocke 1995.

Good News About Compliance and Co-operation?

111

This is a dimension of political capacity that the managerial school
rarely discusses and that is unlikely to be exorcized by technical assistance. It is, however, intimately connected to the design of both domestic political institutions and international regimes. One possible strategy
is to restrict regime membership to states that will not have to defect
very often. The idea is that whatever benefit is lost by excluding such
states from the regime will be more than made up by permitting those
that are included to set and also enforce a deeper level of cooperation – in
this case a higher standard of free trade. This may be a reason, quite
different from the large-n coordination concerns of collective action
theory, why many deeply cooperative regimes have a limited number of
members and why regimes with a large number of members tend to
engage in only shallow cooperation. Is this trade-off real? Must states
sometimes choose between aggressively addressing an environmental or
trade problem and trying to create a community of states? We do not
know. What we do know is that to ignore the issue on the basis of high
compliance rates and the relative absence of enforcement is dangerously
premature.
* * *

part iii
LEGALIZATION AND ITS LIMITS

6
The Concept of Legalization

Kenneth W. Abbott, Robert O. Keohane,
Andrew Moravcsik, Anne-Marie Slaughter, and
Duncan Snidal

* * *
‘‘Legalization’’ refers to a particular set of characteristics that institutions
may (or may not) possess. These characteristics are defined along three
dimensions: obligation, precision, and delegation. Obligation means that
states or other actors are bound by a rule or commitment or by a set of
rules or commitments. Specifically, it means that they are legally bound by
a rule or commitment in the sense that their behavior thereunder is
subject to scrutiny under the general rules, procedures, and discourse of
international law, and often of domestic law as well. Precision means that
rules unambiguously define the conduct they require, authorize, or proscribe. Delegation means that third parties have been granted authority
to implement, interpret, and apply the rules; to resolve disputes; and (possibly) to make further rules.
Each of these dimensions is a matter of degree and gradation, not a
rigid dichotomy, and each can vary independently. Consequently, the
concept of legalization encompasses a multidimensional continuum,
ranging from the ‘‘ideal type’’ of legalization, where all three properties
are maximized; to ‘‘hard’’ legalization, where all three (or at least
obligation and delegation) are high; through multiple forms of partial
or ‘‘soft’’ legalization involving different combinations of attributes;
and finally to the complete absence of legalization, another ideal type.
None of these dimensions – far less the full spectrum of legalization – can
be fully operationalized. We do, however, consider in the section entitled ‘‘The Dimensions of Legalization’’ a number of techniques by
which actors manipulate the elements of legalization; we also suggest
115

116

International Law and International Relations

several corresponding indicators of the strength or weakness of legal
arrangements.
* * *
Our conception of legalization creates common ground for political
scientists and lawyers by moving away from a narrow view of law as
requiring enforcement by a coercive sovereign. This criterion has underlain
much international relations thinking on the topic. Since virtually no
international institution passes this standard, it has led to a widespread
disregard of the importance of international law. But theoretical work in
international relations has increasingly shifted attention away from the
need for centralized enforcement toward other institutionalized ways of
promoting cooperation.1 In addition, the forms of legalization we observe
at the turn of the millennium are flourishing in the absence of centralized
coercion.
* * *

the variability of legalization
A central feature of our conception of legalization is the variability of each
of its three dimensions, and therefore of the overall legalization of
international norms, agreements, and regimes. This feature is illustrated
in Figure 6.1. In Figure 6.1 each element of the definition appears as a continuum, ranging from the weakest form (the absence of legal obligation,
precision, or delegation, except as provided by the background operation
of the international legal system) at the left to the strongest or ‘‘hardest’’
form at the right.2 Figure 6.1 also highlights the independence of these
dimensions from each other: conceptually, at least the authors of a legal
instrument can combine any level of obligation, precision, and delegation
to produce an institution exactly suited to their specific needs. (In
practice, as we shall explain, certain combinations are employed more
frequently than others.)

1

2

See the debate between the ‘‘managerial’’ perspective that emphasizes centralization but
not enforcement, Chayes and Chayes 1995, and the ‘‘compliance’’ perspective that
emphasizes enforcement but sees it as decentralized, Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom 1996.
On the ‘‘obligation’’ dimension, jus cogens refers to an international legal rule – generally
one of customary law, though perhaps one codified in treaty form – that creates an
especially strong legal obligation, such that it cannot be overridden even by explicit
agreement among states.

The Concept of Legalization

117

Obligation

Expressly
nonlegal norm

Binding rule
(jus cogens)

Precision

Vague
principle

Precise, highly
elaborated rule

Delegation

Diplomacy

International court,
organization;
domestic application

figure 6.1. The dimensions of legalization.

It would be inappropriate to equate the right-hand end points of these
dimensions with ‘‘law’’ and the left-hand end points with ‘‘politics,’’ for
politics continues (albeit in different forms) even where there is law. Nor
should one equate the left-hand end points with the absence of norms or
institutions; as the designations in Figure 6.1 suggest, both norms (such as
ethical principles and rules of practice) and institutions (such as diplomacy
and balance of power) can exist beyond these dimensions. Figure 6.1 simply represents the components of legal institutions.
Using the format of Figure 6.1, one can plot where a particular arrangement falls on the three dimensions of legalization. For example, the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPs),
administered by the World Trade Organization (WTO), is strong on all
three elements. The 1963 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the
Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water is legally binding and quite
precise, but it delegates almost no legal authority. And the 1975 Final Act
of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe was
explicitly not legally binding and delegated little authority, though it was
moderately precise.
The format of Figure 6.1 can also be used to depict variations in the
degree of legalization between portions of an international instrument
(John King Gamble, Jr. has made a similar internal analysis of the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea3) and within a given instrument or
regime over time. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for
example, was only minimally legalized (it was explicitly aspirational,
not overly precise, and weakly institutionalized), but the human rights
regime has evolved into harder forms over time. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights imposes binding legal obligations,
3

Gamble 1985.

118

International Law and International Relations

spells out concepts only adumbrated in the declaration, and creates
(modest) implementing institutions.4
Table 6.1 further illustrates the remarkable variety of international
legalization. Here, for concise presentation, we characterize obligation,
precision, and delegation as either high or low. The eight possible
combinations of these values are shown in Table 1; rows are arranged
roughly in order of decreasing legalization, with legal obligation, a peculiarly important facet of legalization, weighted most heavily, delegation
next, and precision given the least weight. A binary characterization
sacrifices the continuous nature of the dimensions of legalization as shown
in Figure 6.1 and makes it difficult to depict intermediate forms. Yet the
table usefully demonstrates the range of institutional possibilities encompassed by the concept of legalization, provides a valuable shorthand
for frequently used clusters of elements, and highlights the tradeoffs
involved in weakening (or strengthening) particular elements.
Row I on this table corresponds to situations near the ideal type of
full legalization, as in highly developed domestic legal systems. Much of
European Community (EC) law belongs here. In addition, the WTO administers a remarkably detailed set of legally binding international agreements;
it also operates a dispute-settlement mechanism, including an appellate
tribunal with significant – if still not fully proven – authority to interpret and
apply those agreements in the course of resolving particular disputes.
Rows II–III represent situations in which the character of law remains
quite hard, with high legal obligation and one of the other two elements
coded as ‘‘high.’’ Because the combination of relatively imprecise rules and
strong delegation is a common and effective institutional response to uncertainty, even in domestic legal systems (the Sherman Antitrust Act in the
United States is a prime example), many regimes in row II should be considered virtually equal in terms of legalization to those in row I. Like the
Sherman Act, for example, the original European Economic Community
(EEC) rules of competition law (Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome)
were for the most part quite imprecise. Over time, however, the exercise
of interpretive authority by the European courts and the promulgation of
regulations by the Commission and Council produced a rich body of
law. The 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
Layer (row III), in contrast, created a quite precise and elaborate set of
4

The declaration has also contributed to the evolution of customary international law,
which can be applied by national courts as well as international organs, and has been
incorporated into a number of national constitutions.

The Concept of Legalization

119

table 6.1. Forms of International Legalization
Type

Obligation

Ideal type:
Hard law
I
High

Precision

Delegation

Examples

High

High

EC; WTO – TRIPs;
European human rights
convention; International
Criminal Court
EEC Antitrust, Art. 85–6;
WTO – national treatment
U.S.–Soviet arms control
treaties; Montreal
Protocol
UN Committee on
Sustainable Development
(Agenda 21)
Vienna Ozone Convention;
European Framework
Convention on National
Minorities
UN specialized agencies;
World Bank; OSCE High
Commissioner on
National Minorities
Helsinki Final Act;
Nonbinding Forest
Principles; technical
standards
Group of 7; spheres of
influence; balance of
power

II

High

Low

High

III

High

High

Low

IV

Low

High

High
(moderate)

V

High

Low

Low

VI

Low

Low

High
(moderate)

VII

Low

High

Low

VIII

Low

Low

Low

Ideal type:
Anarchy

legally binding rules but did not delegate any significant degree of authority for implementing them. Because third-party interpretation and
application of rules is so central to legal institutions, we consider this
arrangement less highly legalized than those previously discussed.
As we move further down the table, the difficulties of dichotomizing
and ordering our three dimensions become more apparent. For example,
it is not instructive to say that arrangements in row IV are necessarily more

120

International Law and International Relations

legalized than those in row V; this judgment requires a more detailed
specification of the forms of obligation, precision, and delegation used in
each case. In some settings a strong legal obligation (such as the original
Vienna Ozone Convention, row V) might be more legalized than a weaker
obligation (such as Agenda 21, row IV), even if the latter were more precise
and entailed stronger delegation. Furthermore, the relative significance of
delegation vis-a`-vis other dimensions becomes less clear at lower levels,
since truly ‘‘high’’ delegation, including judicial or quasi-judicial authority,
almost never exists together with low levels of legal obligation. The kinds
of delegation typically seen in rows IV and VI are administrative or operational in nature (we describe this as ‘‘moderate’’ delegation in Table 6.1).
Thus one might reasonably regard a precise but nonobligatory agreement
(such as the Helsinki Final Act, row VII) as more highly legalized than
an imprecise and nonobligatory agreement accompanied by modest
administrative delegation (such as the High Commissioner on National
Minorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
row VI).5 The general point is that Table 6.1 should be read indicatively,
not as a strict ordering.
The middle rows of Table 6.1 suggest a wide range of ‘‘soft’’ or intermediate forms of legalization. Here norms may exist, but they are difficult to apply as law in a strict sense. The 1985 Vienna Convention for the
Protection of the Ozone Layer (row V), for example, imposed binding
treaty obligations, but most of its substantive commitments were expressed in general, even hortatory language and were not connected to an
institutional framework with independent authority. Agenda 21, adopted
at the 1992 Rio Conference on Environment and Development (row IV),
spells out highly elaborated norms on numerous issues but was clearly
intended not to be legally binding and is implemented by relatively weak
UN agencies. Arrangements like these are often used in settings where
norms are contested and concerns for sovereign autonomy are strong,
making higher levels of obligation, precision, or delegation unacceptable.
Rows VI and VII include situations where rules are not legally
obligatory, but where states either accept precise normative formulations
or delegate authority for implementing broad principles. States often delegate discretionary authority where judgments that combine concern for

5

Interestingly, however, while the formal mandate of the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities related solely to conflict prevention and did not entail authority to
implement legal (or nonlegal) norms, in practice the High Commissioner has actively
promoted respect for both hard and soft legal norms. Ratner 2000.

The Concept of Legalization

121

professional standards with implicit political criteria are required, as with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the other
international organizations in row VI. Arrangements such as those in row
VII are sometimes used to administer coordination standards, which actors have incentives to follow provided they expect others to do so, as well
as in areas where legally obligatory actions would be politically infeasible.
Examples of rule systems entailing the very low levels of legalization
in row VIII include ‘‘balances of power’’ and ‘‘spheres of influence.’’ These
are not legal institutions in any real sense. The balance of power was
characterized by rules of practice6 and by arrangements for diplomacy, as
in the Concert of Europe. Spheres of influence during the Cold War were
imprecise, obligations were partly expressed in treaties but largely tacit,
and little institutional framework existed to oversee them.
Finally, at the bottom of the table, we approach the ideal type of anarchy
prominent in international relations theory. ‘‘Anarchy’’ is an easily misunderstood term of art, since even situations taken as extreme forms of
international anarchy are in fact structured by rules – most notably rules
defining national sovereignty – with legal or pre-legal characteristics.
Hedley Bull writes of ‘‘the anarchical society’’ as characterized by institutions like sovereignty and international law as well as diplomacy and the
balance of power.7 Even conceptually, moreover, there is a wide gap
between the weakest forms of legalization and the complete absence of
norms and institutions.
Given the range of possibilities, we do not take the position that greater
legalization, or any particular form of legalization, is inherently superior.8
As Kenneth Abbott and Duncan Snidal argue in ‘‘Hard and Soft Law in
International Governance’’ (this volume), institutional arrangements in
the middle or lower reaches of Table 1 may best accommodate the diverse
interests of concerned actors. ***
* * *
In the remainder of this article we turn to a more detailed explication
of the three dimensions of legalization. We summarize the discussion in
each section with a table listing several indicators of stronger or weaker
legalization along the relevant dimension, with delegation subdivided into
judicial and legislative/administrative components.
6
7
8

Kaplan 1957.
Bull 1977.
Compare Goldstein, Kahler, Keohane, and Slaughter.

122

International Law and International Relations

the dimensions of legalization
Obligation
Legal rules and commitments impose a particular type of binding obligation on states and other subjects (such as international organizations).
Legal obligations are different in kind from obligations resulting from
coercion, comity, or morality alone. As discussed earlier, legal obligations
bring into play the established norms, procedures, and forms of discourse
of the international legal system.
The fundamental international legal principle of pacta sunt servanda
means that the rules and commitments contained in legalized international agreements are regarded as obligatory, subject to various defenses
or exceptions, and not to be disregarded as preferences change. They
must be performed in good faith regardless of inconsistent provisions of
domestic law. International law also provides principles for the interpretation of agreements and a variety of technical rules on such matters as
formation, reservation, and amendments. Breach of a legal obligation is
understood to create ‘‘legal responsibility,’’ which does not require
a showing of intent on the part of specific state organs.
* * *
Establishing a commitment as a legal rule invokes a particular form of
discourse. Although actors may disagree about the interpretation or
applicability of a set of rules, discussion of issues purely in terms of
interests or power is no longer legitimate. ***
Commitments can vary widely along the continuum of obligation, as
summarized in Table 6.2. An example of a hard legal rule is Article 24 of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which reads in its entirety: ‘‘The archives and documents of the mission shall be inviolable
at any time and wherever they may be.’’ As a whole, this treaty reflects
the intent of the parties to create legally binding obligations governed
by international law. It uses the language of obligation; calls for the traditional legal formalities of signature, ratification, and entry into force;
requires that the agreement and national ratification documents be
registered with the UN; is styled a ‘‘Convention;’’ and states its relationship to preexisting rules of customary international law. Article 24 itself
imposes an unconditional obligation in formal, even ‘‘legalistic’’ terms.
At the other end of the spectrum are instruments that explicitly negate
any intent to create legal obligations. The best-known example is the 1975

The Concept of Legalization

123

table 6.2. Indicators of Obligation
High
Unconditional obligation; language and other indicia
of intent to be legally bound
Political treaty: implicit conditions on obligation
National reservations on specific obligations; contingent
obligations and escape clauses
Hortatory obligations
Norms adopted without law-making authority;
recommendations and guidelines
Explicit negation of intent to be legally bound
Low

Helsinki Final Act. By specifying that this accord could not be registered
with the UN, the parties signified that it was not an ‘‘agreement. . . governed by international law.’’ Other instruments are even more explicit:
witness the 1992 ‘‘Non-Legally Binding Authoritative Statement of
Principles for a Global Consensus’’ on sustainable management of forests.
Many working agreements among national government agencies are
explicitly non-binding.9 Instruments framed as ‘‘recommendations’’ or
‘‘guidelines’’ – like the OECD Guidelines on Multinational Enterprises –
are normally intended not to create legally binding obligations.10
* * *
Actors utilize many techniques to vary legal obligation between these
two extremes, often creating surprising contrasts between form and
substance. On the one hand, *** provisions of legally binding agreements
frequently are worded to circumscribe their obligatory force. ***
* * *
On the other hand, a large number of instruments state seemingly unconditional obligations even though the institutions or procedures through
which they were created have no direct law-creating authority! Many
UN General Assembly declarations, for example, enunciate legal norms,
though the assembly has no formal legislative power.11
9
10

11

Zaring 1998.
Although precise obligations are generally an attribute of hard legalization, these
instruments use precise language to avoid legally binding character.
See Chinkin 1989; and Gruchalla-Wesierski 1984.

124

International Law and International Relations

*** Over time, even nonbinding declarations can shape the practices
of states and other actors and their expectations of appropriate conduct,
leading to the emergence of customary law or the adoption of harder
agreements. Soft commitments may also implicate the legal principle of
good faith compliance, weakening objections to subsequent developments. In many issue areas the legal implications of soft instruments
are hotly contested. Supporters argue for immediate and universal legal
effect under traditional doctrines (for example, that an instrument codifies
existing customary law or interprets an organizational charter) and
innovative ones (for example, that an instrument reflects an international
‘‘consensus’’ or ‘‘instant custom’’). As acts of international governance,
then, soft normative instruments have a finely wrought ambiguity.12

Precision
A precise rule specifies clearly and unambiguously what is expected of
a state or other actor (in terms of both the intended objective and the
means of achieving it) in a particular set of circumstances. In other
words, precision narrows the scope for reasonable interpretation.13 In
Thomas Franck’s terms, such rules are ‘‘determinate.’’14 For a set of
rules, precision implies not just that each rule in the set is unambiguous,
but that the rules are related to one another in a noncontradictory way,
creating a framework within which case-by-case interpretation can be
coherently carried out.15 Precise sets of rules are often, though by no
means always, highly elaborated or dense, detailing conditions of

12
13

14
15

Palmer 1992.
A precise rule is not necessarily more constraining than a more general one. Its actual
impact on behavior depends on many factors, including subjective interpretation by the
subjects of the rule. Thus, a rule saying ‘‘drive slowly’’ might yield slower driving than
a rule prescribing a speed limit of 55 miles per hour if the drivers in question would
normally drive 50 miles per hour and understand ‘‘slowly’’ to mean 10 miles per hour
slower than normal. (We are indebted to Fred Schauer for both the general point and the
example.) In addition, precision can be used to define limits, exceptions, and loopholes
that reduce the impact of a rule. Nevertheless, for most rules requiring or prohibiting
particular conduct – and in the absence of precise delegation – generality is likely to
provide an opportunity for deliberate self-interested interpretation, reducing the impact,
or at least the potential for enforceable impact, on behavior.
Franck 1990.
Franck labels this collective property ‘‘coherence.’’ We use the singular notion of
precision to capture both the precision of a rule in isolation and its precision within
a rule system.

The Concept of Legalization

125

application, spelling out required or proscribed behavior in numerous
situations, and so on.
* * *
In highly developed legal systems, normative directives are often formulated as relatively precise ‘‘rules’’ (‘‘do not drive faster than 50 miles per
hour’’), but many important directives are also formulated as relatively
general ‘‘standards’’ (‘‘do not drive recklessly’’).16 The more ‘‘rule-like’’ a
normative prescription, the more a community decides ex ante which
categories of behavior are unacceptable; such decisions are typically made
by legislative bodies. The more ‘‘standard-like’’ a prescription, the more a
community makes this determination ex post, in relation to specific sets of
facts; such decisions are usually entrusted to courts. Standards allow
courts to take into account equitable factors relating to particular actors
or situations, albeit at the sacrifice of some ex ante clarity.17 Domestic
legal systems are able to use standards like ‘‘due care’’ or the Sherman
Act’s prohibition on ‘‘conspiracies in restraint of trade’’ because they include well-established courts and agencies able to interpret and apply them
(high delegation), developing increasingly precise bodies of precedent.
* * *
In most areas of international relations, judicial, quasi-judicial, and
administrative authorities are less highly developed and infrequently used.
In this thin institutional context, imprecise norms are, in practice, most
often interpreted and applied by the very actors whose conduct they
are intended to govern. In addition, since most international norms are
created through the direct consent or practice of states, there is no centralized legislature to overturn inappropriate, self-serving interpretations.
Thus, precision and elaboration are especially significant hallmarks of
legalization at the international level.
Much of international law is in fact quite precise, and precision and
elaboration appear to be increasing dramatically, as exemplified by the
WTO trade agreements, environmental agreements like the Montreal
(ozone) and Kyoto (climate change) Protocols, and the arms control
treaties produced during the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) and
16

17

The standard regime definition encompasses three levels of precision: ‘‘principles,’’
‘‘norms,’’ and ‘‘rules.’’ Krasner 1983. This formulation reflects the fact that societies
typically translate broad normative values into increasingly concrete formulations that
decision-makers can apply in specific situations.
Kennedy 1976.

126

International Law and International Relations
table 6.3. Indicators of Precision
High
Determinate rules: only narrow issues of interpretation
Substantial but limited issues of interpretation
Broad areas of discretion
‘‘Standards’’: only meaningful with reference to specific situations
Impossible to determine whether conduct complies
Low

subsequent negotiations. Indeed, many modern treaties are explicitly
designed to increase determinacy and narrow issues of interpretation
through the ‘‘codification’’ and ‘‘progressive development’’ of customary
law. Leading examples include the Vienna Conventions on the Law of
Treaties and on Diplomatic Relations, and important aspects of the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea. ***
Still, many treaty commitments are vague and general, in the ways
suggested by Table 6.3.18 The North American Free Trade Agreement side
agreement on labor, for example, requires the parties to ‘‘provide for high
labor standards.’’ *** Commercial treaties typically require states to
create ‘‘favorable conditions’’ for investment and avoid ‘‘unreasonable’’
regulations. Numerous agreements call on states to ‘‘negotiate’’ or
‘‘consult,’’ without specifying particular procedures. All these provisions
create broad areas of discretion for the affected actors; indeed, many
provisions are so general that one cannot meaningfully assess compliance,
casting doubt on their legal force.19 As Abbott and Snidal emphasize
in their article,20 such imprecision is not generally the result of a failure
of legal draftsmanship, but a deliberate choice given the circumstances
of domestic and international politics.
Imprecision is not synonymous with state discretion, however, when
it occurs within a delegation of authority and therefore grants to an
international body wider authority to determine its meaning. *** A recent
example makes the point clearly. At the 1998 Rome conference that
18

19

20

Operationalizing the relative precision of different formulations is difficult, except in a
gross sense. Gamble, for example, purports to apply a four-point scale of ‘‘concreteness’’
but does not characterize these points. Gamble 1985.
The State Department’s Foreign Relations Manual states that undertakings couched in
vague or very general terms with no criteria for performance frequently reflect an intent
not to be legally bound.
Abbott and Snidal 2000.

The Concept of Legalization

127

approved a charter for an international criminal court, the United States
sought to avoid any broad delegation of authority. Its proposal accordingly emphasized the need for ‘‘clear, precise, and specific definitions of
each offense’’ within the jurisdiction of the court.21
Delegation
The third dimension of legalization is the extent to which states and
other actors delegate authority to designated third parties – including
courts, arbitrators, and administrative organizations – to implement
agreements. The characteristic forms of legal delegation are third-party
dispute settlement mechanisms authorized to interpret rules and apply
them to particular facts (and therefore in effect to make new rules, at least
interstitially) under established doctrines of international law. Disputesettlement mechanisms are most highly legalized when the parties agree
to binding third-party decisions on the basis of clear and generally applicable rules; they are least legalized when the process involves political
bargaining between parties who can accept or reject proposals without
legal justification.22
In practice, as reflected in Table 6.4a, dispute-settlement mechanisms
cover an extremely broad range: from no delegation (as in traditional
political decision making); through institutionalized forms of bargaining, including mechanisms to facilitate agreement, such as mediation
(available within the WTO) and conciliation (an option under the Law
of the Sea Convention); nonbinding arbitration (essentially the mechanism of the old GATT); binding arbitration (as in the U.S.-Iran Claims
Tribunal); and finally to actual adjudication (exemplified by the European
Court of Justice and Court of Human Rights, and the international
criminal tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia).
* * *
As one moves up the delegation continuum, the actions of decisionmakers are increasingly governed, and legitimated, by rules. (Willingness to
21

22

U.S. Releases Proposal on Elements of Crimes at the Rome Conference on the
Establishment of an International Criminal Court, statement by James P. Rubin, U.S.
State Department spokesperson, 22 June 1998, ,secretary.state.gov/www/briefings/
statements/1998/ps980622b.html., accessed 16 February 1999.
Law remains relevant even here. The UN Charter makes peaceful resolution of disputes
a legal obligation, and general international law requires good faith in the conduct of
negotiations. In addition, resolution of disputes by agreement can contribute to the
growth of customary international law.

128

International Law and International Relations
table 6.4. Indicators of Delegation

a. Dispute resolution
High
Courts: binding third-party decisions; general jurisdiction;
direct private access; can interpret and supplement rules;
domestic courts have jurisdiction
Courts: jurisdiction, access or normative authority limited or consensual
Binding arbitration
Nonbinding arbitration
Conciliation, mediation
Institutionalized bargaining
Pure political bargaining
Low
b. Rule making and implementation
High
Binding regulations; centralized enforcement
Binding regulations with consent or opt-out
Binding internal policies; legitimation of decentralized enforcement
Coordination standards
Draft conventions; monitoring and publicity
Recommendations; confidential monitoring
Normative statements
Forum for negotiations
Low

delegate often depends on the extent to which these rules are thought
capable of constraining the delegated authority.) *** Delegation to thirdparty adjudicators is virtually certain to be accompanied by the adoption of
rules of adjudication. The adjudicative body may then find it necessary to
identify or develop rules of recognition and change, as it sorts out conflicts
between rules or reviews the validity of rules that are the subject of dispute.
Delegation of legal authority is not confined to dispute resolution. As
Table 6.4b indicates, a range of institutions – from simple consultative
arrangements to fullfledged international bureaucracies – helps to elaborate
imprecise legal norms, implement agreed rules, and facilitate enforcement.
* * *
Legalized delegation, especially in its harder forms, introduces new
actors and new forms of politics into interstate relations. Actors with

The Concept of Legalization

129

delegated legal authority have their own interests, the pursuit of which
may be more or less successfully constrained by conditions on the grant of
authority and concomitant surveillance by member states. Transnational
coalitions of nonstate actors also pursue their interests through influence
or direct participation at the supranational level, often producing greater
divergence from member state concerns. Deciding disputes, adapting
or developing new rules, implementing agreed norms, and responding to
rule violations all engender their own type of politics, which helps to
restructure traditional interstate politics.

conclusion
Highly legalized institutions are those in which rules are obligatory on
parties through links to the established rules and principles of international law, in which rules are precise (or can be made precise through the
exercise of delegated authority), and in which authority to interpret and
apply the rules has been delegated to third parties acting under the
constraint of rules. There is, however, no bright line dividing legalized
from nonlegalized institutions. Instead, there is an identifiable continuum
from hard law through varied forms of soft law, each with its individual
mix of characteristics, to situations of negligible legalization.
This continuum presupposes that legalized institutions are to some
degree differentiated from other types of international institutions, a
differentiation that may have methodological, procedural, cultural, and
informational dimensions.23 Although mediators may, for example, be
free to broker a bargain based on the ‘‘naked preferences’’ of the parties,24
legal processes involve a discourse framed in terms of reason, interpretation, technical knowledge, and argument, often followed by deliberation and judgment by impartial parties. Different actors have access to
the process, and they are constrained to make arguments different from
those they would make in a nonlegal context. Legal decisions, too, must
be based on reasons applicable to all similarly situated litigants, not
merely the parties to the immediate dispute.
*** Our conception of legalization reflects a general theme: *** the
rejection of a rigid dichotomy between ‘‘legalization’’ and ‘‘world politics.’’
Law and politics are intertwined at all levels of legalization. One result of
this interrelationship, reflected in many of the articles in this volume, is
23
24

Schauer and Wise 1997.
Sunstein 1986.

130

International Law and International Relations

considerable difficulty in identifying the causal effects of legalization.
Compliance with rules occurs for many reasons other than their legal
status. Concern about reciprocity, reputation, and damage to valuable
state institutions, as well as other normative and material considerations,
all play a role. Yet it is reasonable to assume that most of the time, legal
and political considerations combine to influence behavior.
At one extreme, even ‘‘pure’’ political bargaining is shaped by rules of
sovereignty and other background legal norms. At the other extreme, even
international adjudication takes place in the ‘‘shadow of politics’’: interested parties help shape the agenda and initiate the proceedings;
judges are typically alert to the political implications of possible decisions, seeking to anticipate the reactions of political authorities. Between
these extremes, where most international legalization lies, actors combine and invoke varying degrees of obligation, precision, and delegation
to create subtle blends of politics and law. In all these settings, to paraphrase Clausewitz, ‘‘law is a continuation of political intercourse, with the
addition of other means.’’

7
Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate
and Transnational
Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, and
Anne-Marie Slaughter

International courts and tribunals are flourishing. Depending on how these
bodies are defined, they now number between seventeen and forty.1 In
recent years we have witnessed the proliferation of new bodies and
a strengthening of those that already exist. ‘‘When future international
legal scholars look back at . . . the end of the twentieth century,’’ one
analyst has written, ‘‘they probably will refer to the enormous expansion
of the international judiciary as the single most important development of
the post–Cold War age.’’2
These courts and tribunals represent a key dimension of legalization.
Instead of resolving disputes through institutionalized bargaining, states
choose to delegate the task to third-party tribunals charged with applying
general legal principles. Not all of these tribunals are created alike,
however. In particular, we distinguish between two ideal types of international dispute resolution: interstate and transnational. Our central
argument is that the formal legal differences between interstate and
transnational dispute resolution have significant implications for the
politics of dispute settlement and therefore for the effects of legalization
in world politics.
Interstate dispute resolution is consistent with the view that public
international law comprises a set of rules and practices governing
1

2

Romano 1999, 723–28. By the strictest definition, there are currently seventeen
permanent, independent international courts. If we include some bodies that are not
courts, but instead quasi-judicial tribunals, panels, and commissions charged with similar
functions, the total rises to over forty. If we include historical examples and bodies
negotiated but not yet in operation, the total rises again to nearly one hundred.
Ibid., 709.

131

132

International Law and International Relations

interstate relationships. Legal resolution of disputes, in this model, takes
place between states conceived of as unitary actors. States are the subjects
of international law, which means that they control access to dispute
resolution tribunals or courts. They typically designate the adjudicators of such tribunals. States also implement, or fail to implement, the
decisions of international tribunals or courts. Thus in interstate dispute
resolution, states act as gatekeepers both to the international legal process
and from that process back to the domestic level.
In transnational dispute resolution, by contrast, access to courts and
tribunals and the subsequent enforcement of their decisions are legally
insulated from the will of individual national governments. These tribunals are therefore more open to individuals and groups in civil society. In
the pure ideal type, states lose their gatekeeping capacities; in practice,
these capacities are attenuated. This loss of state control, whether voluntarily or unwittingly surrendered, creates a range of opportunities for
courts and their constituencies to set the agenda.
*** It is helpful to locate our analysis in a broader context. ***
Legalization is a form of institutionalization distinguished by obligation,
precision, and delegation. Our analysis applies primarily when obligation
is high.3 Precision, on the other hand, is not a defining characteristic of the
situations we examine. We examine the decisions of bodies that interpret
and apply rules, regardless of their precision. Indeed, such bodies may
have greater latitude when precision is low than when it is high.4 Our
focus is a third dimension of legalization: delegation of authority to
courts and tribunals designed to resolve international disputes through
the application of general legal principles.5
Three dimensions of delegation are crucial to our argument: independence, access, and embeddedness. As we explain in the first section,
independence specifies the extent to which formal legal arrangements
ensure that adjudication can be rendered impartially with respect to
concrete state interests. Access refers to the ease with which parties other
than states can influence the tribunal’s agenda. Embeddedness denotes the
extent to which dispute resolution decisions can be implemented without
governments having to take actions to do so. We define low independence,
access, and embeddedness as the ideal type of interstate dispute resolution and high independence, access, and embeddedness as the ideal type
3
4
5

Abbott et al., 119 (this book) tab 1, types I–III and V.
Hence we do not exclude types II and V (Abbott et al., tab. 1, 119) from our purview.
See Abbott et al., 119 (this book).

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

133

of transnational dispute resolution. Although admittedly a simplification,
this conceptualization helps us to understand why the behavior and impact
of different tribunals, such as the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and
the European Court of Justice (ECJ), have been so different.
In the second section we seek to connect international politics, international law, and domestic politics. Clearly the power and preferences
of states influence the behavior both of governments and of dispute
resolution tribunals: international law operates in the shadow of power.
Yet within that political context, we contend that institutions for selecting
judges, controlling access to dispute resolution, and legally enforcing the
judgments of international courts and tribunals have a major impact on
state behavior. The formal qualities of legal institutions empower or
disempower domestic political actors other than national governments.
Compared to interstate dispute resolution, transnational dispute resolution tends to generate more litigation, jurisprudence more autonomous of
national interests, and an additional source of pressure for compliance. In
the third section we argue that interstate and transnational dispute
resolution generate divergent longer-term dynamics. Transnational dispute resolution seems to have an inherently more expansionary character;
it provides more opportunities to assert and establish new legal norms,
often in unintended ways.
This article should be viewed as exploratory rather than an attempt to
be definitive. Throughout, we use ideal types to illuminate a complex
subject, review suggestive though not conclusive evidence, and highlight
opportunities for future research. We offer our own conjectures at various
points as to useful starting points for that research but do not purport to
test definitive conclusions.

a typology of dispute resolution
Much dispute resolution in world politics is highly institutionalized.
Established, enduring rules apply to entire classes of circumstances and
cannot easily be ignored or modified when they become inconvenient to
one participant or another in a specific case. In this article we focus on
institutions in which dispute resolution has been delegated to a third-party
tribunal charged with applying designated legal rules and principles. This
act of delegation means that disputes must be framed as ‘‘cases’’ between
two or more parties, at least one of which, the defendant, will be a state or
an individual acting on behalf of a state. (Usually, states are the defendants,
so we refer to defendants as ‘‘states.’’ However, individuals may also be

134

International Law and International Relations

prosecuted by international tribunals, as in the proposed International
Criminal Court and various war crimes tribunals.6) The identity of the
plaintiff depends on the design of the dispute resolution mechanism.
Plaintiffs can be other states or private parties – individuals or nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) – specifically designated to monitor
and enforce the obligatory rules of the regime.
We turn now to our three explanatory variables: independence, access,
and embeddedness. We do not deny that the patterns of delegation we
observe may ultimately have their origins in the power and interests of
major states, as certain strands of liberal and realist theory claim.
Nevertheless, our analysis here takes these sources of delegation as given
and emphasizes how formal legal institutions empower groups and
individuals other than national governments.7

Independence: Who Controls Adjudication?
The variable independence measures the extent to which adjudicators for
an international authority charged with dispute resolution are able to
deliberate and reach legal judgments independently of national governments. In other words, it assesses the extent to which adjudication is
rendered impartially with respect to concrete state interests in a specific
case. The traditional international model of dispute resolution in law and
politics places pure control by states at one end of a continuum. Disputes
are resolved by the agents of the interested parties themselves. Each side
offers its own interpretation of the rules and their applicability to the case
at issue; disagreements are resolved through institutionalized interstate
bargaining. There are no permanent rules of procedure or legal precedent,
although in legalized dispute resolution, decisions must be consistent with
international law. Institutional rules may also influence the outcome by
determining the conditions – interpretive standards, voting requirements,
selection – under which authoritative decisions are made.8 Even where
6
7

8

We do not discuss the interesting case of international criminal law here. See Bass 1998.
This central focus on variation in the political representation of social groups, rather than
interstate strategic interaction, is the central tenet of theories of international law that rest
on liberal international relations theory. Slaughter 1995a. Our approach is thus closely
linked in this way to republican liberal studies of the democratic peace, the role of
independent executives and central banks in structuring international economic policy
coordination, and the credibility of commitments by democratic states more generally.
See Keohane and Nye 1977; Moravcsik 1997; Doyle 1983a,b; and Goldstein 1996.
Helfer and Slaughter 1997.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

135

legal procedures are established, individual governments may have the
right to veto judgments, as in the UN Security Council and the old
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Movement along the continuum away from this traditional interstate
mode of dispute resolution measures the nature and tightness of the
political constraints imposed on adjudicators. The extent to which
members of an international tribunal are independent reflects the extent
to which they can free themselves from at least three categories of
institutional constraint: selection and tenure, legal discretion, and control
over material and human resources.
* * *
Selection and tenure rules vary widely. Many international institutions
maintain tight national control on dispute resolution through selection
and tenure rules.9 Some institutions – including the UN, International
Monetary Fund, NATO, and the bilateral Soviet–U.S. arrangements
established by the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT) – establish
no authoritative third-party adjudicators whatsoever. The regime creates
instead a set of decision-making rules and procedures, a forum for
interstate bargaining, within which subsequent disputes are resolved by
national representatives serving at the will of their governments. In other
institutions, however, such as the EU, governments can name representatives, but those representatives are assured long tenure and may enjoy
subsequent prestige in the legal world independent of their service to
individual states. In first-round dispute resolution in GATT and the World
Trade Organization (WTO), groups of states select a stable of experts
who are then selected on a case-by-case basis by the parties and the
secretariat, whereas in ad hoc international arbitration, the selection is
generally controlled by the disputants and the tribunal is constituted for
a single case.
In still other situations – particularly in authoritarian countries –
judges may be vulnerable to retaliation when they return home after
completing their tenure; even in liberal democracies, future professional
advancement may be manipulated by the government.10 The legal basis of
some international dispute resolution mechanisms, such as the European
9

10

Even less independent are ad hoc and arbitral tribunals designed by specific countries
for specific purposes. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, for
example, provides experts, arbiters, and conciliators for ad hoc dispute resolution. Here
we consider only permanent judicial courts. See Romano 1999, 711–13.
For a domestic case of judicial manipulation, see Ramseyer and Rosenbluth 1997.

International Law and International Relations

136

table 7.1. The Independence Continuum: Selection and Tenure
Level of
independence
Low
Moderate

High

Selection method and tenure
Direct representatives, perhaps with
single-country veto
Disputants control ad hoc selection
of third-party judges
Groups of states control selection of
third-party judges
Individual governments appoint judges
with long tenure
Groups of states select judges with
long tenure

International court
or tribunal
UN Security Council
PCA
ICJ, GATT, WTO
ECJ
ECHR, IACHR

Court of Human Rights (ECHR), requires oversight by semi-independent
supranational bodies. The spectrum of legal independence as measured
by selection and tenure rules is shown in Table 7.1.
Legal discretion, the second criterion for judicial independence, refers
to the breadth of the mandate granted to the dispute resolution body.
Some legalized dispute resolution bodies must adhere closely to treaty
texts; but the ECJ, as Karen Alter describes,11 has asserted the supremacy
of European Community (EC) law without explicit grounding in the
treaty text or the intent of national governments. More generally,
institutions for adjudication arise, as Abbott and Snidal argue,12 under
conditions of complexity and uncertainty, which render interstate contracts necessarily incomplete. Adjudication is thus more than the act of
applying precise standards and norms to a series of concrete cases within
a precise mandate; it involves interpreting norms and resolving conflicts
between competing norms in the context of particular cases. When
seeking to overturn all but the most flagrantly illegal state actions,
litigants and courts must inevitably appeal to particular interpretations
of such ambiguities. Other things being equal, the wider the range of
considerations the body can legitimately consider and the greater the
uncertainty concerning the proper interpretation or norm in a given case,
the more potential legal independence it possesses. ***
11

12

Karen J. Alter, ‘‘The European Union’s Legal System and Domestic Policy Spillover or
Backlash?’’ International Organization 54, 3 (Summer 2000) p. 489.
Kenneth W. Abbott and Duncan Snidal, ‘‘Hard and Soft Law in International Governance’’, International Organization 54, 3 (Summer 2000), p. 421.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

137

The third criterion for judicial independence, financial and human
resources, refers to the ability of judges to process their caseloads
promptly and effectively.13 Such resources are necessary for processing
large numbers of complaints and rendering consistent, high-quality
decisions. They can also permit a court or tribunal to develop a factual
record independent of the state litigants before them and to publicize their
decisions. This is of particular importance for human rights courts, which
seek to disseminate information and mobilize political support on behalf
of those who would otherwise lack direct domestic access to effective
political representation.14 Many human rights tribunals are attached to
commissions capable of conducting independent inquiries. The commissions of the Inter-American and UN systems, for example, have been
active in pursuing this strategy, often conducting independent, on-site
investigations.15 Indeed, inquiries by the Inter-American Commission
need not be restricted to the details of a specific case, though a prior
petition is required. In general, the greater the financial and human
resources available to courts and the stronger the commissions attached
to them, the greater their legal independence.
In sum, the greater the freedom of a dispute resolution body from
the control of individual member states over selection and tenure, legal
discretion, information, and financial and human resources, the greater
its legal independence.
Access: Who Has Standing?
Access, like independence, is a variable. From a legal perspective, access
measures the range of social and political actors who have legal standing to
submit a dispute to be resolved; from a political perspective, access
measures the range of those who can set the agenda. Access is particularly
important with respect to courts and other dispute resolution bodies
because, in contrast to executives and legislatures, they are ‘‘passive’’
organs of government unable to initiate action by unilaterally seizing a
dispute. Access is measured along a continuum between two extremes. At
one extreme, if no social or political actors can submit disputes, dispute
resolution institutions are unable to act; at the other, anyone with
a legitimate grievance directed at government policy can easily and
13
14
15

Helfer and Slaughter 1997.
Keck and Sikkink 1998.
Farer 1998.

138

International Law and International Relations

inexpensively submit a complaint. In-between are situations in which
individuals can bring their complaints only by acting through governments, convincing governments to ‘‘espouse’’ their claim as a state claim
against another government, or by engaging in a costly procedure. This
continuum of access can be viewed as measuring the ‘‘political transaction
costs’’ to individuals and groups in society of submitting their complaint
to an international dispute resolution body. The more restrictive the
conditions for bringing a claim to the attention of a dispute resolution
body, the more costly it is for actors to do so.
Near the higher-cost, restrictive end, summarized in Table 7.2, fall
purely interstate tribunals, such as the GATT and WTO panels, the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the ICJ, in which only member
states may file suit against one another. Although this limitation constrains access to any dispute resolution body by granting one or more
governments a formal veto, it does not permit governments to act without constraint. Individuals and groups may still wield influence, but they
must do so by domestic means. Procedures that are formally similar in
this sense may nonetheless generate quite different implications for
access, depending on principal-agent relationships in domestic politics.
Whereas individuals and groups may have the domestic political power
to ensure an ongoing if indirect role in both the decision to initiate proceedings and the resulting argumentation, state-controlled systems are
likely to be more restrictive than direct litigation by individuals and groups.
* * *
Within these constraints, GATT/WTO panels and the ICJ differ in their
roles toward domestic individuals and groups. In the GATT and now the
WTO, governments nominally control access to the legal process, yet in
practice injured industries are closely involved in both the initiation and
the conduct of the litigation by their governments, at least in the United
States. *** In the ICJ, by contrast, individual access is more costly. The ICJ
hears cases in which individuals may have a direct interest (such as the
families of soldiers sent to fight in another country in what is allegedly an
illegal act of interstate aggression). However, these individuals usually
have little influence over a national government decision to initiate
interstate litigation or over the resulting conduct of the proceedings. As
in the WTO individuals are unable to file suit against their own government before the ICJ. ***
Near the permissive end of the spectrum is the ECJ. Individuals may
ultimately be directly represented before the international tribunal, though

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

139

table 7.2. The Access Continuum: Who Has Standing?
Level of
access
Low
Moderate
High

Who has standing
Both states must agree
Only a single state can file suit
Single state files suit, influenced by social actors
Access through national courts
Direct individual (and sometimes group) access
if domestic remedies have been exhausted

International
court or tribunal
PCA
ICJ
WTO, GATT
ECJ
ECHR, IACHR

the decision to bring the case before it remains in the hands of a domestic
judicial body. Under Article 177 of the Treaty of Rome, national courts
may independently refer a case before them to the ECJ if the case raises
questions of European law that the national court does not feel competent
to resolve on its own. The ECJ answers the specific question(s) presented
and sends the case back to the national court for disposition of the merits of
the dispute. Litigants themselves can suggest such a referral to the national
court, but the decision to refer lies ultimately within the national court’s
discretion. Whether the interests involved are narrow and specific – as in
the landmark Cassis de Dijon case over the importation of French specialty liquors into Germany – or broad, the cost of securing such a referral
is the same. As Karen Alter shows in her article,16 different national
courts have sharply different records of referral, but over time national
courts as a body have become increasingly willing to refer cases to the
ECJ. These referrals may involve litigation among private parties rather
than simply against a public authority.17
Also near the low-cost end of the access spectrum lie formal human
rights enforcement systems, including the ECHR, the IACHR, the
African Convention on Human and People’s Rights, and the UN’s
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Since the end of
World War II we have witnessed a proliferation of international tribunals

16

17

Karen J. Alter, ‘‘The European Union’s Legal System and Domestic Policy: Spillover or
Backlash?’’, International Organization 54, 3 (Summer 2000), p. 489.
It therefore remains unclear, on balance, whether the EC or the ECHR provides more
ready access. Whereas the EC system under Article 177 allows only domestic courts, not
individuals, to refer cases, the EC does not require, as does the ECHR and all other
human rights courts, that domestic remedies be exhausted.

International Law and International Relations

140

table 7.3. The Embeddedness Continuum: Who Enforces the Law?
Level of
embeddedness
Low

Moderate

High

Who enforces

International court
or tribunal

Individual governments can
GATT
veto implementation
of legal judgment
WTO, ICJ
No veto, but no domestic legal
enforcement; most human
rights systems
International norms enforced
EC, incorporated human
by domestic courts
rights norms under ECHR,
national systems in which
treaties are self-executing or
given direct effect

to which individuals have direct access, though subject to varying
restrictions. ***
* * *
Legal Embeddedness: Who Controls Formal Implementation?
*** Implementation and compliance in international disputes are problematic to a far greater degree than they are in well-functioning, domestic
rule-of-law systems. The political significance of delegating authority over
dispute resolution therefore depends in part on the degree of control
exercised by individual governments over the legal promulgation and
implementation of judgments. State control is affected by formal legal
arrangements along a continuum that we refer to as embeddedness.
The spectrum of domestic embeddedness, summarized in Table 7.3,
runs from strong control over promulgation and implementation of
judgments by individual national governments to very weak control. At
one extreme, that of strong control, lie systems in which individual litigants can veto the promulgation of a judgment ex post. In the old
GATT system, the decisions of dispute resolution panels had to be
affirmed by consensus, affording individual litigants an ex post veto.
Under the less tightly controlled WTO, by contrast, disputes among
member governments are resolved through quasi-judicial panels whose
judgments are binding unless reversed by unanimous vote of the Dispute

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

141

Settlement Body, which consists of one representative from each WTO
member state.
Most international legal systems fall into the same category as the WTO
system; namely, states are bound by international law to comply with
judgments of international courts or tribunals, but no domestic legal
mechanism assures legal implementation. If national executives and
legislatures fail to take action because of domestic political opposition
or simply inertia, states simply incur a further international legal obligation to repair the damage. In other words, if an international tribunal rules
that state A has illegally intervened in state B’s internal affairs and orders
state A to pay damages, but the legislature of state A refuses to
appropriate the funds, state B has no recourse at international law except
to seek additional damages. Alternatively, if state A signs a treaty
obligating it to change its domestic law to reduce the level of certain
pollutants it is emitting, and the executive branch is unsuccessful in
passing legislation to do so, state A is liable to its treaty partners at
international law but cannot be compelled to take the action it agreed
to take in the treaty.
* * *
At the other end of the spectrum, where the control of individual
governments is most constrained by the embeddedness of international
norms, lie systems in which autonomous national courts can enforce
international judgments against their own governments. The most striking
example of this mode of enforcement is the EC legal system. Domestic
courts in every member state recognize that EC law is superior to national
law (supremacy) and that it grants individuals rights on the basis of which
they can litigate (direct effect). When the ECJ issues advisory opinions to
national courts under the Article 177 procedure described in detail in
Karen Alter’s article,18 national courts tend to respect them, even
when they clash with the precedent set by higher national courts. These
provisions are nowhere stated explicitly in the Treaty of Rome but have
been successfully ‘‘constitutionalized’’ by the ECJ over the past four
decades.19 The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) court system
established in 1994 permits such referrals as well, though, unlike the
Treaty of Rome, it neither legally obliges domestic courts to refer nor
18

19

Karen J. Alter, ‘‘The European Union’s Legal System and Domestic Policy: Spillover or
Backlash?’’, International Organization 54, 3 (Summer 2000), p. 489.
Weiler 1991.

142

International Law and International Relations

table 7.4. Legal Characteristics of International Courts and Tribunals
International
court or tribunals
ECJ
ECHR, since 1999
ECHR, before 1999
IACHR
WTO panels
ICJ
GATT panels
PCA
UN Security Council

Legal characteristics
Independence
High
High
Moderate to higha
Moderate to higha
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low to moderate
Low

Access
High
High
Low to
High
Low to
Low to
Low to
Lowe
Low to

highb
moderated
moderated
moderated
moderateg

Embeddedness
Highf
Low to highc
Low to highc
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low

a

Depends on whether government recognizes optional clauses for compulsory jurisdiction
of the court.
b
Depends on whether government accepts optional clause for individual petition.
c
Depends on whether domestic law incorporates or otherwise recognized the treaty.
d
Depends on mobilization and domestic access rules for interest groups concerned.
e
Both parties must consent. Recent rule changes have begun to recognize nonstate actors.
f
Embeddedness is not a formal attribute of the regime but the result of the successful
assertion of legal sovereignty.
g
Permanent members of the Security Council can veto; nonmembers cannot.
Source: Sands et al. 1999.

legally binds the domestic court to apply the result. Domestic courts do
nonetheless appear to enforce EFTA court decisions.20
* * *
Two Ideal Types: Interstate and Transnational Dispute Resolution
The three characteristics of international dispute resolution – independence, access, and embeddedness – are closely linked.*** The characteristics of the major courts in the world today are summarized in Table 7.4,
which reveals a loose correlation across categories. Systems with higher
values on one dimension have a greater probability of having higher
values in the other dimensions. This finding suggests that very high values
on one dimension cannot fully compensate for low values on another.

20

Sands, Mackenzie, and Shany 1999, 148.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

143

Strong support for independence, access, or embeddedness without strong
support for the others undermines the effectiveness of a system.
Combining these three dimensions creates two ideal types. In one
ideal type – interstate dispute resolution – adjudicators, agenda, and enforcement are all subject to veto by individual national governments.
Individual states decide who judges, what they judge, and how the judgment is enforced. At the other end of the spectrum, adjudicators, agenda,
and enforcement are all substantially independent of individual and collective pressure from national governments. We refer to this ideal type as
transnational dispute resolution.21 In this institutional arrangement, of
which the EU and ECHR are the most striking examples, judges are
insulated from national governments, societal individuals and groups
control the agenda, and the results are implemented by an independent
national judiciary. In the remainder of this article we discuss the
implications of variation along the continuum from interstate to transnational dispute resolution for the nature of, compliance with, and
evolution of international jurisprudence.
In discussing this continuum, however, let us not lose sight of the fact
that values on the three dimensions move from high to low at different
rates. Table 7.4 reveals that high levels of independence and access appear
to be more common than high levels of embeddedness, and, though the
relationship is weaker, a high level of independence appears to be slightly
more common than a high level of access. In other words, between those
tribunals that score high or low on all three dimensions, there is a
significant intermediate range comprising tribunals with high scores
on independence and/or access but not on the others.22 Among those
international legal institutions that score high on independence and
access but are not deeply embedded in domestic legal systems are some
international human rights institutions. Among those institutions that
score high on independence but not on access or embeddedness are
GATT/WTO multilateral trade institutions and the ICJ.

21

22

We use the term ‘‘transnational’’ to capture the individual to individual or individual to
state nature of many of the cases in this type of dispute resolution. However, many of the
tribunals in this category, such as the ECJ and the ECHR, can equally be described as
‘‘supranational’’ in the sense that they sit ‘‘above’’ the nation-state and have direct power
over individuals and groups within the state. One of the authors has previously used the
label ‘‘supranational’’ to describe these tribunals (Helfer and Slaughter 1997); no significance should be attached to the shift in terminology here.
Not surprisingly, domestic legal embeddedness is less common than widespread domestic
access, since the former is a prerequisite for the latter.

144

International Law and International Relations

the politics of litigation and compliance: from
interstate to judicial politics
Declaring a process ‘‘legalized’’ does not abolish politics. Decisions about
the degree of authority of a particular tribunal, and access to it, are
themselves sites of political struggle. The sharpest struggles are likely to
arise ex ante in the bargaining over a tribunal’s establishment; but other
opportunities for political intervention may emerge during the life of
a tribunal, perhaps as a result of its own constitutional provisions. Form
matters, however. The characteristic politics of litigation and compliance
are very different under transnational dispute resolution than under
interstate dispute resolution. In this section we explicate these differences
and propose some tentative conjectures linking our three explanatory
variables to the politics of dispute resolution.
The Interstate and Transnational Politics of Judicial Independence
*** As legal systems move from interstate dispute resolution toward the
more independent judicial selection processes of transnational dispute
resolution, we expect to observe greater judicial autonomy – defined as the
willingness and ability to decide disputes against national governments.
Other things being equal, the fewer opportunities national governments
have to influence the selection of judges, the available information, the
support or financing of the court, and the precise legal terms on which the
court can decide, the weaker is their likely influence over the decisions of an
international tribunal.
* * *
The Interstate and Transnational Politics of Access
What are the political implications of movement from low access (interstate dispute resolution) to high access (transnational dispute resolution)? Our central contention is that we are likely to observe, broadly
speaking, a different politics of access as we move toward transnational
dispute resolution – where individuals, groups, and courts can appeal
or refer cases to international tribunals. As the actors involved become
more diverse, the likelihood that cases will be referred increases, as does
the likelihood that such cases will challenge national governments – in
particular, the national government of the plaintiff. The link between
formal access and real political power is not obvious. States might still
manipulate access to judicial process regarding both interstate and

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

145

transnational litigation by establishing stringent procedural rules, bringing
political pressure to bear on potential or actual litigants, or simply carving
out self-serving exceptions to the agreed jurisdictional scheme. ***
Access to classic arbitral tribunals, such as those constituted under the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, requires the consent of both states. ***
Slightly more constraining arrangements are found in classic interstate
litigation before the Permanent Court of International Justice in the
1920s and 1930s, the ICJ since 1945, and the short-lived Central American
Court of Justice. In these systems, a single state decides when and how to
sue, even if it is suing on behalf of an injured citizen or group of citizens.
The state formally ‘‘espouses’’ the claim of its national(s), at which point
the individual’s rights terminate (unless entitled to compensation as a
domestic legal or constitutional matter), as does any control over or even
say in the litigation strategy. The government is thus free to prosecute the
claim vigorously or not at all, or to engage in settlement negotiations for
a sum far less than the individual litigant(s) might have found acceptable.
Such negotiations can resemble institutionalized interstate bargaining
more than a classic legal process in which the plaintiff decides whether
to continue the legal struggle or to settle the case.
* * *
Although in interstate dispute resolution states decide when and
whether to sue other states, they cannot necessarily control whether
they are sued. If they are sued, whether any resulting judgments can be
enforced depends both on their acceptance of compulsory jurisdiction
and, where the costs of complying with a judgment are high, on their
willingness to obey an adverse ruling. ***
* * *
The de facto system is one in which most states, like the United States,
reserve the right to bring specific cases to the ICJ or to be sued in specific
cases as the result of an ad hoc agreement with other parties to a dispute of
specific provisions in a bilateral or multilateral treaty. This system ensures
direct control over access to the ICJ by either requiring all the parties to
a dispute to agree both to third-party intervention and to choose the ICJ as
the third party, or by allowing two or more states to craft a specific
submission to the court’s jurisdiction in a limited category of disputes
arising from the specific subject matter of a treaty.23 ***
23

Rosenne 1995.

146

International Law and International Relations

table 7.5. Access Rules and Dockets of International Courts and Tribunals

Level of access
Low
Medium

High

International
court or tribunal

Average annual number
of cases since founding

PCA
ICJ
GATT
WTO
Old ECHR
EC

0.3
1.7
4.4
30.5
23.9
100.1

Source: Sands et al. 1999, 4, 24, 72, 125, 200.

More informally, potential defendants may exert political pressure on
plaintiff states not to sue or to drop a suit once it has begun. When
confronted by an unfavorable GATT panel judgment (in favor of Mexico)
concerning U.S. legislation to protect dolphins from tuna fishing,
[for example,] the United States exercised its extra-institutional power to
induce Mexico to drop the case before the judgment could be enforced. ***
The preceding discussion of access suggests two conjectures:
1. The broader and less costly the access to an international court or
tribunal, the greater the number of cases it will receive.
2. The broader and less expensive the access to an international court
or tribunal, the more likely that complaints challenge the domestic
practices of national governments – particularly the home government of the complainant.
* * *
The comparative data summarized in Table 7.5 further support
[the first] conjecture. The average caseload of six prominent international
courts varies as predicted, with legal systems granting low access generating the fewest number of average cases, those granting high access
generating the highest number of cases, and those granting moderate
access in between. The difference between categories is roughly an order of
magnitude or more. While we should be cautious about imputing causality
before more extensive controlled studies are performed, the data suggest
the existence of a strong relationship.
Case study evidence supports the conjecture that transnational dispute
resolution systems with high levels of access tend to result in cases being
brought in national courts against the home government. This is the

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

147

standard method by which cases reach the ECJ. For example, the Cassis de
Dijon case – a classic ECJ decision in 1979 establishing the principle
of mutual recognition of national regulations – concerned the right to
export a French liquor to Germany, yet a German importer, not the French
producer, sued the German government, charging that domestic regulations
on liquor purity were creating unjustified barriers to interstate trade.24
The Interstate and Transnational Politics of Embeddedness
Even if cases are brought before tribunals and these tribunals render
judgments against states, the extent to which judgments are legally enforceable may differ. We have seen that most international legal systems
create a legal obligation for governments to comply but leave enforcement to interstate bargaining. Only a few legal systems empower individuals and groups to seek enforcement of their provisions in domestic
courts. However, in our ideal type of transnational dispute resolution,
international commitments are embedded in domestic legal systems,
meaning that governments, particularly national executives, no longer
need to take positive action to ensure enforcement of international judgments. Instead, enforcement occurs directly through domestic courts and
executive agents who are responsive to judicial decisions. The politics of
embedded systems of dispute resolution are very different from the politics of systems that are not embedded in domestic politics.
* * *
Despite the real successes, in some circumstances, of interstate dispute
resolution, it clearly has political limitations, especially where compliance
constituencies are weak. Under interstate dispute resolution, pressures
for compliance have to operate through governments. The limitations of
such practices are clear under arbitration, and notably with respect to the
ICJ. In the case involving mining of Nicaragua’s harbors, the United States
did not obey the ICJ’s judgment. Admittedly, the Reagan administration
did not simply ignore the ICJ judgment with respect to the mining of
Nicaragua’s harbors, but felt obliged to withdraw its recognition of the
ICJ’s jurisdiction – a controversial act with significant domestic political
costs for a Republican president facing a Democratic Congress. Nevertheless, in the end the United States pursued a policy contrary to the ICJ’s
24

Case 120/78, Rewe-Zentrale AG v. Bundesmonopolverwaltungfur Branntwein (Cassis
de Dijon), 1978.

148

International Law and International Relations

decision. Even in trade regimes, political pressure sometimes leads to
politically bargained settlements, as in the case of the U.S. Helms-Burton
legislation. And a number of countries have imposed unilateral limits on
the ICJ’s jurisdiction.
* * *
The politics of transnational dispute resolution are quite different. By
linking direct access for domestic actors to domestic legal enforcement,
transnational dispute resolution opens up an additional source of political
pressure for compliance, namely favorable judgments in domestic courts.
This creates a new set of political imperatives. It gives international tribunals additional means to pressure or influence domestic government
institutions in ways that enhance the likelihood of compliance with their
judgments. It pits a recalcitrant government not simply against other
governments but also against legally legitimate domestic opposition; an
executive determined to violate international law must override his or her
own legal system. Moreover, it thereby permits international tribunals to
develop a constituency of litigants who can later pressure government
institutions to comply with the international tribunal’s decision.25 ***
* * *
Transnational dispute resolution does not sweep aside traditional
interstate politics, but the power of national governments has to be filtered
through norms of judicial professionalism, public opinion supporting
particular conceptions of the rule of law, and an enduring tension between
calculations of short- and long-term interests. Individuals and groups can
zero in on international court decisions as focal points around which to
mobilize, creating a further intersection between transnational litigation
and democratic politics.
This discussion of the politics of interstate and transnational dispute
resolution suggests that the following two conjectures deserve more
intensive study.
1. Other things being equal, the more firmly embedded an international commitment is in domestic law, the more likely is compliance
with judgments to enforce it.
2. Liberal democracies are particularly respectful of the rule of law and
most open to individual access to judicial systems; hence attempts to

25

Helfer and Slaughter 1997.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

149

embed international law in domestic legal systems should be most
effective among such regimes. In relations involving nondemocracies, we should observe near total reliance on interstate dispute
resolution. Even among liberal democracies, the trust placed in
transnational dispute resolution may vary with the political independence of the domestic judiciary.
Although embedding international commitments does not guarantee
increased compliance, we find good reason to conclude that embeddedness
probably tends to make compliance more likely in the absence of a strong
political counteraction. ***

the interstate and transnational dynamics
of legalization
We have considered the static politics of legalization. Yet institutions also
change over time and develop distinctive dynamics. Rules are elaborated.
The costs of veto, withdrawal, or exclusion from the ‘‘inner club’’ of an
institution may increase if the benefits provided by institutionalized
cooperation increase. Sunk costs create incentives to maintain existing
practices rather than to begin new ones. Politicians’ short time horizons
can induce them to agree to institutional practices that they might not
prefer in the long term, in order to gain advantages at the moment.26
What distinguishes legalized regimes is their potential for setting in
motion a distinctive dynamic built on precedent, in which decisions on
a small number of specific disputes create law that may govern by analogy
a vast array of future practices. This may be true even when the first
litigants in a given area do not gain satisfaction. Judges may adopt modes
of reasoning that assure individual litigants that their arguments have been
heard and responded to, even if they have not won the day in a particular
case. Some legal scholars argue that this ‘‘casuistic’’ style helps urge
litigants, whether states or individuals, to fight another day.27
Although both interstate and transnational dispute resolution have the
potential to generate such a legal evolution, we maintain that transnational
dispute resolution increases the potential for such dynamics of precedent.
The greater independence of judges, wider access of litigants, and greater
potential for legal compliance insulates judges, thereby allowing them to

26
27

See Keohane and Hoffmann 1991; Alter 1998a; and Pollack 1997.
See White 1990; Glendon 1991; and Sunstein 1996.

150

International Law and International Relations

develop legal precedent over time without triggering noncompliance,
withdrawal, or reform by national governments. We next consider in
more detail the specific reasons why.
The Dynamics of Interstate Third-party Dispute Resolution
In interstate legal systems, the potential for self-generating spillover
depends on how states perform their gatekeeping roles. As we will show,
where states open the gates, the results of interstate dispute resolution
may to some degree resemble the results of transnational dispute resolution. However, in the two major international judicial or quasi-judicial
tribunals – the Permanent Court of Arbitration and the ICJ – states have
been relatively reluctant to bring cases. The great majority of arbitration
cases brought before the Permanent Court of Arbitration were heard in the
court’s early years, shortly after the first case in 1902. The court has seen
little use recently – the Iran Claims Tribunal being an isolated if notable
exception.
States have been reluctant to submit to the ICJ’s jurisdiction when the
stakes are large.28 Hence the ICJ has been constrained in developing
a large and binding jurisprudence. *** Still, it is fair to note that use of the
ICJ did increase substantially between the 1960s and 1990s, reaching
an all-time high of nineteen cases on the docket in 1999.29 Although this
increase does not equal the exponential growth of economic and human
rights jurisprudence in this period, it marks a significant shift. In part this
reflects pockets of success that have resulted in expansion of both the law
in a particular area and the resort to it. The ICJ has consistently had
a fairly steady stream of cases concerning international boundary
disputes. In these cases the litigants have typically already resorted to
military conflict that has resulted in stalemate or determined that such
conflict would be too costly. They thus agree to go to court. The ICJ,
in turn, has profited from this willingness by developing an extensive
body of case law that countries and their lawyers can use to assess the
strength of the case on both sides and be assured of a resolution based on
generally accepted legal principles.30
* * *

28
29
30

Chayes 1965.
Ibid.
See, for example, Charney 1994.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

151

The Dynamics of Transnational Dispute Resolution
The key to the dynamics of transnational dispute resolution is access.
Transnational dispute resolution removes the ability of states to perform
gatekeeping functions, both in limiting access to tribunals and in blocking
implementation of their decisions. Its incentives for domestic actors to
mobilize, and to increase the legitimacy of their claims, gives it a capacity
for endogenous expansion. As we will see with respect to GATT and the
WTO, even a formally interstate process may display similar expansionary
tendencies, but continued expansion under interstate dispute resolution
depends on continuing decisions by states to keep access to the dispute
settlement process open. Switching to a set of formal rules nearer the ideal
type of transnational dispute resolution makes it much harder for states
to constrain tribunals and can give such tribunals both incentives and
instruments to expand their authority by expanding their caseload. Indeed,
tribunals can sometimes continue to strengthen their authority even when
opposed by powerful states – particularly when the institutional status quo
is favorable to tribunals and no coalition of dissatisfied states is capable of
overturning the status quo.31
The pool of potential individual litigants is several orders of magnitude
larger than that of state litigants. Independent courts have every incentive
to recruit from that pool. Cases breed cases. A steady flow of cases, in turn,
allows a court to become an actor on the legal and political stage, raising its
profile in the elementary sense that other potential litigants become aware
of its existence and in the deeper sense that its interpretation and
application of a particular legal rule must be reckoned with as a part of
what the law means in practice. Litigants who are likely to benefit from
that interpretation will have an incentive to bring additional cases to
clarify and enforce it. Further, the interpretation or application is itself
likely to raise additional questions that can only be answered through
subsequent cases. Finally, a court gains political capital from a growing
caseload by demonstrably performing a needed function.
Transnational tribunals have the means at their disposal to target
individual litigants in various ways. The most important advantage they
have is the nature of the body of law they administer. Transnational
litigation, whether deliberately established by states (as in the case of
the ECHR) or adapted and expanded by a supranational tribunal itself (as
in the case of the ECJ), only makes sense when interstate rules have
31

See Alter 1998a; and Alter 2000.

152

International Law and International Relations

dimensions that make them directly applicable to individual activity.
Thus, in announcing the direct effect doctrine in Van Gend and Loos, the
ECJ was careful to specify that only those portions of the Treaty of Rome
that were formulated as clear and specific prohibitions on or mandates of
member states’ conduct could be regarded as directly applicable.32
Human rights law is by definition applicable to individuals in relations
with state authorities, although actual applicability will also depend on
the clarity and specificity of individual human rights prohibitions and
guarantees.
In this way, a transnational tribunal can present itself in its decisions as
a protector of individual rights and benefits against the state, where the
state itself has consented to these rights and benefits and the tribunal is
simply holding it to its word. This is the clear thrust of the passage from
Van Gend and Loos quoted earlier, in which the ECJ announced that
‘‘Community law . . . imposes obligations on individuals but is also intended to confer on them rights that become part of their legal heritage.’’
The ECHR, for its part, has developed the ‘‘doctrine of effectiveness,’’
which requires that the provisions of the European Human Rights
Convention be interpreted and applied so as to make its safeguards
‘‘practical and effective’’ rather than ‘‘theoretical or illusory.’’33 Indeed,
one of its judges has described the ECHR in a dissenting opinion as the
‘‘last resort protector of oppressed individuals.’’34 Such rhetoric is backed
up by a willingness to find for the individual against the state.35
Ready access to a tribunal can create a virtuous circle: a steady stream of
cases results in a stream of decisions that serve to raise the profile of the
court and hence to attract more cases. When the ECJ rules, the decision is
implemented not by national governments – the recalcitrant defendants –
but by national courts. Any subsequent domestic opposition is rendered
far more difficult. In sum, transnational third-party dispute resolution has
led to a de facto alliance between certain national courts, certain types of
individual litigants, and the ECJ. This alliance has been the mechanism by
which the supremacy and direct effect of EC law, as well as thousands
of specific substantive questions, have been established as cornerstones of
the European legal order.36
32

33
34
35
36

Case 26/62, N. V. Algemene Transp. and Expeditie Onderneming Van Gend and Loos v.
Nederslandse administratie der belastingen. 1963 E.C.R. 1, 12.
Bernhardt 1994.
Cossey v. United Kingdom, 184 E.C.H.R., ser. A (1990).
Helfer and Slaughter 1997.
See Burley and Mattli 1993; and Weiler 1991 and 1999.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

153

* * *
The motives of these national courts are multiple. They include a desire
for ‘‘empowerment,’’37 competition with other courts for relative prestige
and power,38 a particular view of the law that could be achieved by
following EC precedents over national precedents,39 recognition of the
greater expertise of the ECJ in European law,40 and the desire to
advantage or at least not to disadvantage a particular constituency of
litigants.41 Similar dynamics of intracourt competition may be observed
in relations between national courts and the ECHR.42 National courts
appear to have been more willing to challenge the perceived interests of
other domestic authorities once the first steps had been taken by other
national courts. Weiler has documented the cross-citation of foreign
supreme court decisions by national supreme courts accepting the
supremacy of EC law for the first time. He notes that though they may
have been reluctant to restrict national autonomy in a way that would
disadvantage their states relative to other states, they are more willing to
impose such restrictions when they are ‘‘satisfied that they are part of
a trend.’’ An alternative explanation of this trend might be ideational;
courts feel such a step is more legitimate.43
* * *
Beyond Formalism: The Dynamics of GATT and the WTO
The contrast between the two ideal types of dispute resolution we have
constructed – interstate and transnational – illuminates the impact of
judicial independence, differential rules of access, and variations in the
domestic embeddedness of an international dispute resolution process.
The ICJ fits the interstate dispute resolution pattern quite well; the ECJ
approximates the ideal type of transnational dispute resolution. The form
that legalization takes seems to matter.
Form, however, is not everything. Politics is affected by form but
not determined by it. This is most evident when we seek to explain more

37
38
39
40
41
42
43

See Weiler 1991; and Burley and Mattli 1993.
Alter 1996b, and 1998a,b.
Mattli and Slaughter 1998b.
Craig 1998.
Plo¨tner 1998.
Jarmul 1996.
See Weiler 1994; and Finnemore and Sikkink 1998.

154

International Law and International Relations

fine-grained variations in the middle of the spectrum between the two ideal
types. The evolution of the GATT, and recently the WTO, illustrates how
politics can alter the effects of form. Formally, as we pointed out earlier,
GATT is closer to the ideal type of interstate dispute resolution than to
transnational dispute resolution. The independence of tribunals is coded
as moderate for both GATT and WTO. On the embeddedness criterion,
GATT was low and WTO, with its mandatory procedures, is moderate
(see Table 7.4). Most important, however, are access rules: in both the old
GATT and the ITO (since 1 January 1995), states have the exclusive right
to bring cases before tribunals. In formal terms, therefore, states are the
gatekeepers to the GATT/WTO process.
We noted in the first section, however, that the relationships between
actors in civil society and representatives of the state are very different in
GATT/WTO than in the ICJ. In the GATT/WTO proceedings the principal actors from civil society are firms or industry groups, which are
typically wealthy enough to afford extensive litigation and often have substantial political constituencies. Industry groups and firms have been quick
to complain about allegedly unfair and discriminatory actions by their
competitors abroad, and governments have often been willing to take up
their complaints. Indeed, it has often been convenient for governments
to do so, since the best defense against others’ complaints in a system
governed by reciprocity is often the threat or reality of bringing one’s own
case against their discriminatory measures. In a ‘‘tit-for-tat’’ game, it is
useful to have an army of well-documented complaints ‘‘up one’s sleeve’’
to deter others from filing complaints or as retaliatory responses to such
complaints. Consequently, although states retain formal gatekeeping
authority in the GATT/WTO system, they often have incentives to open
the gates, letting actors in civil society set much of the agenda.
The result of this political situation is that the evolution of the GATT
dispute settlement procedure looks quite different from that of the ICJ:
indeed, it seems intermediate between the ideal types of interstate and
transnational dispute resolution. Dispute resolution activity levels have
increased substantially over time, as the process has become more
legalized. Adjudication in the GATT of the 1950s produced vague
decisions, which were nevertheless relatively effective, arguably because
GATT was a ‘‘club’’ of like-minded trade officials.44 Membership changes
and the emergence of the EC in the 1960s led to decay in the dispute
resolution mechanism, which only began to reverse in the 1970s.
44

This paragraph and the subsequent one rely on Hudec 1999, especially 6–17.

Legalized Dispute Resolution: Interstate and Transnational

155

Diplomatic, nonlegalized attempts to resolve disputes, however, were
severely criticized, leading to the appointment of a professional legal
staff and the gradual legalization of the process. With legalization came
better-argued decisions and the creation of a body of precedent.
Throughout this period, the formal procedures remained entirely
voluntary: defendants could veto any step in the process. This ‘‘procedural
flimsiness,’’ as Robert E. Hudec refers to it, is often taken as a major
weakness of GATT; but Hudec has shown that it did not prevent GATT
from being quite effective. By the late 1980s, 80 percent of GATT cases
were disposed of effectively – not as a result of legal embeddedness but of
political decisions by states. This is a reasonably high level of compliance,
though not as high as attained by the EC and ECHR. The WTO was built
on the success of GATT, particularly in recent years, rather than being
a response to failure.45
We infer from the GATT/WTO experience that although the formal
arrangements we have emphasized are important, their dynamic effects
depend on the broader political context. Our ideal-type argument should
not be reified into a legalistic, single-factor explanation of the dynamics
of dispute resolution. Even if states control gates, they can under some
conditions be induced to open them, or even to encourage actors from
civil society to enter the dispute resolution arena. The real dynamics of
dispute resolution typically lie in some interaction between law and
politics, rather than in the operation of either law or politics alone.
* * *

Conclusion
We have constructed two ideal types of legalized dispute resolution,
interstate and transnational, which vary along the dimensions of independence, access, and embeddedness. When we examine international
courts, we find that the distinction between the two ideal types appears to
be associated with variation in the size of dockets and levels of compliance
with decisions. The differences between the ICJ and the ECJ are dramatic
along both dimensions. The causal connections between outcomes and
45

The annual number of cases before the WTO has risen to almost twice the number during
the last years of GATT; but Hudec argues that this change is accounted for by the new or
intensified obligations of the Uruguay Round, rather than being attributable to changes
in the embeddedness of the dispute resolution mechanism. Hudec 1999, 21. Hudec
acknowledges, however, that he is arguing against the conventional wisdom.

156

International Law and International Relations

correspondence with one ideal type or the other will require more research
and analysis to sort out; but the differences between the ICJ and ECJ
patterns cannot be denied. Their dynamics also vary greatly: the ECJ
has expanded its caseload and its authority in a way that is unparalleled
in the ICJ.
The GATT/WTO mechanisms do not reflect our ideal types so faithfully.
States remain formal legal gatekeepers in these systems but have often
refrained from tightly limiting access to dispute resolution procedures. As
a result, the caseload of the GATT processes, and the effectiveness of their
decisions, increased even without high formal levels of access or embeddedness. Hence, GATT and the WTO remind us that legal form does not
necessarily determine political process. It is the interaction of law and
politics, not the action of either alone, that generates decisions and
determines their effectiveness.
What transnational dispute resolution does is to insulate dispute
resolution to some extent from the day-to-day political demands of
states. The more we move toward transnational dispute resolution, the
harder it is to trace individual judicial decisions and states’ responses to
them back to any simple, short-term matrix of state or social preferences,
power capabilities, and cross-issues. Political constraints, of course, continue to exist, but they are less closely binding than under interstate dispute
resolution. Legalization imposes real constraints on state behavior; the
closer we are to transnational third-party dispute resolution, the greater
those constraints are likely to be. Transnational dispute resolution systems help to mobilize and represent particular groups that benefit from
regime norms. This increases the costs of reversal to national governments and domestic constituents, which can in turn make an important
contribution to the enforcement and extension of international norms.
For this reason, transnational dispute resolution systems have become an
important source of increased legalization and a factor in both interstate
and intrastate politics.

8
Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic
Politics: A Cautionary Note
Judith Goldstein and Lisa L. Martin

*** In this article we consider how increases in the legalization of the
international trade regime interact with the trade-related interests of
domestic actors. Although legalization may reduce incentives for cheating
by individual nations, we identify ways in which the unintended effects of
legalization on the activities of domestic economic actors could interfere
with the pursuit of progressive liberalization of international trade.
Domestic politics cannot be treated as extraneous or as an irrational
source of error that obstructs the purposes of legalization. Instead, politics
operates in systematic ways and is the mechanism through which legalization exerts its effects. These effects range far beyond reducing opportunism by unitary states.
Through incremental change in the postwar years, the international
trade regime has evolved away from its origins as a decentralized and
relatively powerless institution and become a legal entity. The number of
countries and the amount of trade covered by the rules agreed to in 1947
have expanded greatly. After 1995 and the creation of the World Trade
Organization (WTO), the regime further increased its demands on members by elaborating and expanding commercial rules and procedures, including those that relate to the system of settling disputes. In practice the
expansion of the regime in the post–World War II period has made trade
rules more precise and binding. The result is that the implications or

We thank Bob Keohane, Marc Busch, Eric Anderson, James Fearon, Erica Gould, Barry
Weingast, Simon Jackman, Brian Hanson, Richard Steinberg, an anonymous reviewer, and
the editors of IO for comments on a previous version of this article.

157

158

International Law and International Relations

behavioral demands of rules have become increasingly transparent to all
participants.1
We argue that this increased legalization does not necessarily augur
higher levels of trade liberalization, as suggested by supporters. The
weakly legalized General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) regime
was remarkably successful at liberalizing trade; it is not apparent that
the benefits of further legalization will outweigh its costs. This finding
derives from an analysis of domestic politics and, in particular, from the
incentives facing leaders to join and then adhere to the dictates of a liberal international trade regime. We support our position through an
analysis of two aspects of trade politics.
First, we examine the effect of legalization on the incentives of domestic groups to mobilize and pressure their governments to adopt policies
that favor them.2 *** We believe that better information will empower
protectionists relative to free traders on issues relating to the conclusion
of new agreements and free traders relative to protectionists on issues of
compliance to existing agreements. Second, we examine the implications
of a more ‘‘binding’’ GATT/WTO on member governments. Although
GATT rules were always obligatory in a legal sense, the provisions for
using escape clauses and other loopholes interacted with domestic political realities in a way that made their use increasingly rare. This fact,
combined with a strengthened dispute-resolution mechanism under
the WTO, has increased the extent to which governments are ‘‘obliged,’’
in a political sense, to maintain their liberal commitments. Reducing
the ability of governments to opt out of commitments has the positive
effect of reducing the chances that governments will behave opportunistically by invoking phony criteria for protecting their industries. On
the other hand, tightly binding, unforgiving rules can have negative effects in the uncertain environment of international trade. When considering the realities of incomplete information about future economic

1

2

Legalization refers to three aspects of international law: obligation, precision, and level
of delegation to a centralized authority. Abbott et al., this issue.
The number and variety of groups participating in the politics of trade has grown in
the last decades. Where the classic models assumed three groups with trade-related
interests – consumers, import-competing groups, and exporters – other groups, whose
interests span from human rights to a clean environment, have come to believe that
their interests are influenced by trade negotiations. The logic of this article, explaining the interaction among international regimes, social mobilization, and domestic politics, applies to any interest that groups perceive to be influenced by international trade
agreements.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

159

shocks, we suggest that legalization may not result in the ‘‘correct’’
balance between these two effects of binding.
In this article we develop both the theoretical reasoning and the empirical support for our cautionary note on the domestic effects of legalization. We begin by examining information and group mobilization
and suggest that the predictability that comes with legalization has
both positive and negative effects on the trade liberalization goal of the
regime. We then investigate the ‘‘bindingness’’ of trade rules. Through
examination of the use of safeguards and the new dispute-resolution procedure, we argue that trade rules have become more binding, even if pacta
sunt servanda has always applied to such rules, and that enforcement of
rules is now more certain.
* * *

legalization, information, and the mobilization
of domestic groups
The logic of precision, delegation, obligation, and increased transparency
played a large role in negotiations over transforming the GATT into the
WTO. The intended effect of these modifications in the WTO was to
expand the breadth of the trade regime and enhance compliance so as to
increase the benefits of membership. The problem with this logic is that
it neglected domestic politics. Maintenance of free trade is politically
difficult and is a function of the differential mobilization of those who
favor liberalization and those who oppose a further opening of the
economy to foreign products. Mobilization itself is a function of a number
of factors, including the cost of mobilizing and the potential gains from
collective action. One consequence of legalizing the trade regime has been
greater transparency and predictability about the effects of trade agreements. Increased information of this sort has mixed effects on the
mobilization of domestic interests and therefore on the ability of governments to maintain support for liberal trade policies.
The Logic of Mobilization
Consider first the impact of increased precision of trade rules during the
process of trade negotiations. The ability of leaders to sign an accord will
depend on the groups mobilized for or against the accord. The pattern of
mobilization is not always predictable; mobilizing interest groups requires

160

International Law and International Relations

overcoming collective-action problems that can be quite intense. Actors
within these groups must realize first that they have a common interest in
government policies. They must then come to believe that it is worthwhile
to bear the costs of collective action. A number of factors can undermine
mobilization. The factors most relevant to international trade include
the large and diffuse nature of some economic interests, lack of information that the interests of actors are at stake in particular international
negotiations, and possible calculations that the costs of influencing
government policy outweigh anticipated benefits.3
From the perspective of encouraging the liberalization of international
trade, the fact that groups who prefer economic closure might suffer
from collective-action problems is a blessing. If all antitrade forces were
well organized and able to exert substantial pressure on their political
representatives, the prospects for liberalization would be dim. The interaction with legalization enters the analysis at this point. In that
legalization entails a process of increased precision of rules and transparency of agreements, it affects the behavior of domestic groups by
increasing the information available to actors about the distributional
implications of trade agreements. To the extent that such knowledge
enhances the mobilization of antitrade forces relative to already wellorganized protrade groups, legalization could undermine liberalization.
Information matters for both protectionist and proliberalization interests. However, if these groups are differentially mobilized prior to the
process of legalization, information will have the larger marginal effect
on the groups that are not as well organized. The structure of the multilateral trade regime, based on the principle of reciprocity, has provided
strong incentives for exporters to organize throughout the post-1950
period.4 Growing dependence on exports and the multinational character of economic interests has also led to strong and effective lobbying
efforts by free-trade advocates.5 We therefore concentrate on the likely
impact of greater information on the incentives facing protectionist
groups.
* * *

3

4
5

Collective-action problems have been central to the literature on endogenous tariff
formation. See, for example, Magee, Brock, and Young 1989; and Mayer 1984.
Gilligan 1997.
Milner 1988.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

161

A simple model clarifies the posited relationship between information
and mobilization. Define p to be the probability with which a group
believes that its interests will be at stake in negotiations. This subjective
probability, p, is a random variable that takes on different values as information conditions change. We begin by assuming a poor information
environment, where groups know only the total number of groups
affected, not which of them will be affected.
Assume that there are N groups with an interest in trade. These groups
are not mobilized initially. Assume they know that n groups will be
affected by negotiations but have no information about which n groups
this will be. This is an extreme assumption of poor information but a
useful starting point. Each group therefore estimates that it will have a
stake in negotiations with probability n/N, the ratio of affected groups to
all groups. Given a lack of information, this is their best guess of the
probability of being affected by negotiations. Thus, in the prelegalization
environment, the variable p takes on the value n/N; p ¼ n/N. The value
of p will change as information improves.
Given this value of p prior to legalization, does it make sense for a
group to mobilize? The calculation depends on the relationship between
the expected benefits and costs of mobilization. The benefits of mobilization, B, are realized only if the group is in n. If the group is not in n, it
gains no benefits, but will have to bear the costs of mobilization if it
chooses to mobilize. Given the prelegalization value of p, the expected
benefits from negotiations are p*B, or nB/N. Groups will mobilize if the
expected benefits outweigh mobilization costs C; p*B . C. Thus each
group will mobilize if nB/N . C in the poor information environment.
N is a large number, and the ratio n/N is typically small. Thus, unless
B is extremely large or the costs of mobilization negligible, groups will
not have an incentive to mobilize. Our expectation is that few groups
will meet this stringent prelegalization mobilization condition. As information improves, p increases above the n/N minimum. However, with
uncertainty about the distributional implications of negotiations, p remains small and the ratio of B to C must be large to allow mobilization.
After legalization, we assume that groups know with certainty whether
they will be included in negotiations; that is, their estimate of the
probability p now becomes either zero or 1, as groups know whether
their interests are at stake or not. The value of the random variable
p changes as information conditions change. Groups that do not have
their interests at stake will not mobilize. However, the condition for
groups that are affected by negotiations to mobilize is now p*B . C

162

International Law and International Relations

with p ¼ 1, which is simply B . C. This is a much easier condition to
meet, as long as collective-action costs are not prohibitive (as they may be
for large, diffuse groups such as consumers). Therefore, we expect that
many more groups will find it worthwhile to mobilize in the richer
information environment postlegalization. Even if p does not improve
to the extreme values of zero or 1, it approaches these limits, with the
expected effects.
As suggested earlier, information has effects on groups that may be
harmed as well as helped by negotiations. Our intention here is not
to make precise predictions about the policy outcomes of relative mobilization of exporters and protectionists, but simply to draw attention
to the political problems created by enhanced mobilization of antitrade
groups. Clearly, information will lead both groups to mobilize, given increased certainty on how interests will fare in an agreement. However, a
number of factors suggest that increased information is likely to favor
proprotectionist mobilization. This position goes beyond the classic explanation, for example, Schattschneider’s, that protectionist interests are
concentrated and free-trade interests diffuse, which still has some force.6
The first factor is that the status quo favors protected groups, not potential new exporters. Since changes from the status quo require explicit
affirmation – for example, ratification of a treaty – those who benefit from
the status quo gain veto power. Thus typical institutional procedures that
privilege the status quo will tend to favor protectionist over liberalizing
interests. Another factor pointing in the same direction is the uncertain
nature of gains for exporters. Exporters only know that some market
will open up, not whether they will be able to capitalize on this opportunity in the face of international competition. In contrast, protectionists
know precisely what protection they will be losing as a result of liberalization, enhancing their incentives to mobilize relative to exporters. Moving
beyond a strictly rationalist model, we could also mention experimental
evidence that actors tend to react more strongly to losses than to gains,
again favoring protectionist groups in this mobilization dynamic. Finally,
if we assume, as does Gilligan, that exporters are either fully or almost
fully mobilized and are already participating in the political process,
the increase in information should lead to a relatively greater mobilization of the less involved, that is, the antitrade groups.
The logic of precision and mobilization does not necessarily lead one
to expect economic closure. When we consider the effects of more
6

Schattschneider 1935.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

163

information when maintaining as opposed to creating a trade commitment, we get the opposite effect. Although information may mobilize
import-competers before the conclusion of an agreement, the effect of
a more legalized regime may be to mobilize exporters in cases of certain
market losses, ex post. In this case, precision about which exporters will
bear the costs of retaliation in a trade dispute works to mobilize exporting
interests who would otherwise have no involvement in the trade dispute.
Given the potential of a market loss, they will press governments to
uphold trade rules. The higher the probability that the retaliatory action
will hurt them, the greater their interests in expending resources to
maintain liberal trade at home.
Therefore, logic suggests that increasing rule precision will have two
different, and competing, effects on trade liberalization. Increased determinacy can undermine trade deals by activating import-competing
groups with veto power. Conversely, precise rules regarding responses to
rule breaches will result in more trade liberalization by activating export
groups in the offending country. Over time, we should see not only more
antitrade groups organizing but also more political activity by export
groups if strategies of retaliation are appropriately designed.
Mobilizing Antitrade Groups
Empirical evidence suggests that groups affected by trade policy are
often well organized and articulate. Whether the group is farmers in
France, auto producers in the United States, or computer companies in
Japan, those whose interests will be hurt by either continued or expanded
access to foreign goods, services, and markets are articulate spokespersons for specific policies. These groups often act as veto players, and
leaders who would like to negotiate the opening of world markets find
that fear of competition at home undermines support for their freetrade coalition. The ability of leaders to ignore protectionist pressures
rests on the willingness of proliberalization groups, those who benefit
from liberalized trade, to organize and be equally active in their support.
In the absence of exporters or other interested parties who articulate
their free-trade positions, governments find it difficult to maintain a freetrade policy.7
7

Numerous empirical studies document the importance of groups in setting trade policy.
For a cross-national, cross-sectional examination of groups’ involvement, see, for example, Verdier 1994.

164

International Law and International Relations

Evidence of the effects of this problem of mobilizing and maintaining
a free-trade coalition is found in all democracies and partially results from
the concentrated benefits of trade barriers and their diffuse costs.8 Rarely
are those who are hurt by higher prices (consumers) present in political
debate; more often, trade politics is determined by the balance between
groups with specific interests in either openness or closure. In some
countries, structural factors affect this balance. For example, groups may
be overrepresented because of the electoral process, such as with agricultural producers in Japan, or because they have bureaucratic or corporatist support in government.
Since World War II, protectionist pressures from such groups have
been mitigated through changes in the trade policymaking process, both
domestic and international.9 Reciprocal trade agreements, delegation to
executive agencies, electoral reform, and changing legislative voting rules
help explain why countries support liberal trade policies that were
difficult to defend in the pre–World War II period. The fact of liberalization and the specifics of the process are in equilibrium. The process may
change either because underlying interests change or for exogenous
reasons. Regardless of the particular reason for change, changes in the
process have far-reaching consequences for policy. Process changes have
made it more difficult for import-competing groups to find a majority to
support their position while encouraging the organization of exporter
interests.
The success of groups who support liberalization, however, should
not be construed as evidence that policymakers no longer need to worry
about veto groups undercutting trade policy. Liberalization may have
changed the face of the proprotection lobby, but it has not eliminated its
potential power. Even in the United States, long a proponent of the liberal
trade regime, elected officials repeatedly face pressures from antitrade
groups. *** These social pressures have led strategic trade negotiators to
bundle the gains to exporters from access to new markets with the losses
to import-competing producers from new competition from abroad.
8
9

On trade and interest groups, see Destler 1995; and Lohmann and O’Halloran 1994.
Whether it was a change in the balance of group interests or a shift in trade policymaking
that explains the ability of governments to lower barriers to trade is difficult to determine
in the early years of the GATT regime. Certainly, in the United States interest-group
activity was muted because the costs of organizing increased when the president obtained
increased control of trade policymaking. Still, the shift toward openness would not have
occurred without underlying social support. For an analysis of the relationship between
institutional and underlying social variables, see Bailey, Goldstein, and Weingast 1997.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

165

Whatever the specifics of this trade-off at the negotiating table, the result
must be an agreement that can garner majority support at home. If information about the distributional implication of agreements affects the
propensity of groups to organize during negotiations, it may be easier to
get to that ‘‘optimal bundle’’ in situations where some uncertainty exists
about who is and who is not affected by the trade deal. Providing this
information about the effects of either a potential commercial agreement,
the behavior of a trading partner, or the dissolution of a trading pact is
a central function of the contemporary trade regime. The WTO collects
and disseminates trade data in preparation for rounds of trade talks; it
monitors compliance and inventories national practices that undermine
the free flow of goods and services.
Over time, the GATT/WTO regime has dramatically increased its ability to deliver this information to member countries.10 In initial rounds of
negotiations, tariff information was not systematically collected. Nations
relied on data supplied by their negotiating partners, and thus the
computation of offers and counteroffers for ‘‘balance’’ was done using
often-incomplete statistics. *** In 1989, the Trade Policy Review
Mechanism was authorized at the Montreal midterm review of progress
in the Uruguay Round. This began a process of regular country studies,
providing sector and product information on practices of GATT members. The four largest trading powers – Canada, the European Union
(EU), Japan, and the United States – are reviewed every two years; the
sixteen member countries that are next in the value of their trade are
reviewed every four years; most other members are reviewed every six
years.11 The result has been a more symmetric information environment.12
This increased monitoring activity in itself is not a result of ‘‘legalization’’ according to the definition adopted. Still, it has been tightly bound
up with increased formalization and precision of commitments both at
the time of and during the life of an agreement. The result is a far richer
information environment than at any previous time. One aspect of WTO
operations, for example, that is more public than in the past is the
ministerial meeting. *** Along with changes in WTO policy, a key demand
of antitrade groups has been less secrecy in WTO proceedings. Although
10
11
12

Keesing 1998.
Ibid.
The GATT’s move to the Trade Policy Review Mechanism was motivated by the
perception that information was key in negotiations but that it was available only to
the larger countries. Ibid.

166

International Law and International Relations

some Western governments, including the United States, have defended the
principle of transparency, most representatives in the WTO strenuously
resist this demand.13 Still, transparency has increased over time. Early
rounds were akin to clubs. Deals were struck among a small group of likeminded representatives, behind closed doors. Later rounds eschewed this
general negotiating form. Although private negotiations occurred, and
were often the most productive, more time was spent in formal settings,
with delegates giving prepared speeches that offered few, if any, real trade
concessions. Thus the demand for more transparency has been met by
more open meetings and more press coverage, but the effect of these
particular changes has been muted; delegates continue to worry about
domestic constituencies and remain wary of saying anything that would
get them into trouble at home.
Increased provision of information to delegates is not, we acknowledge, evidence of complete transparency in the trade regime. Although legalization has resulted in a movement toward transparency, we cannot
claim to have reached a situation of complete and perfect information. The
WTO retains many of the elements of the GATT, including its preservation
of member countries’ rights to secrecy. The empirical evidence does not
adequately allow us to make precise estimates of the level of transparency.
We can, however, identify a trend toward greater openness. When the
GATT was established in the late 1940s, the confidentiality rule adopted
by member countries was the strictest of any adopted by postwar international institutions.14 The correspondence of any delegate could be
claimed as privileged. If a delegate did not formally rescind a confidentiality request within three years, the information became confidential in
perpetuity. Why this rule? Simply, delegates did not want information
to leak back home. Offers made during negotiations could be highly
sensitive, and although the final package would be made public, it came
home as a ‘‘closed’’ deal – groups could not easily pick it apart.
The early delegates to the GATT understood that too much information would incur import-competing group pressures and undermine their
ability to make trade-offs among groups. Policymakers need to be able to
bundle agreements in order to procure majorities in their home countries.
For politicians, the logic of membership in a multilateral trade institution
is to facilitate the creation of larger bundles than are possible through
bilateral bargaining.
13
14

New York Times, 4 December 1999, A6.
Richard Blackhurst interviews.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

167

table 8.1. Trade Bills in the U.S. House of
Representatives, 1975–98

1975–78
1979–82
1983–86
1987–90
1991–94
1995–98

Number
of bills

Percentage providing
side payments rather
than direct protection

79
43
61
61
47
48

14
28
26
21
13
38

Source: Congressional Index, various years.

Efforts to devise free-trade coalitions in an environment of market
liberalization help explain the changing structure of trade rounds. ***
* * *
*** Politics was never removed from the liberalization process, although
the regime’s structure did affect which domestic groups were able to
translate their preferences into policy. Thus, adopted formulas were never
intended to be binding on parties, and national offers were rife with
exceptions. Preparation for rounds involved difficult negotiations with
potentially powerful veto groups, often leading to an assortment of side
payments issued in the early phase of negotiations.15 Drawing on U.S.
congressional indexes, we illustrate in Table 8.1 one way that this phenomenon manifested. The table summarizes the rise in the number of
bills that provided side payments, usually in place of a more direct policy
to curb imports. During the 1975–94 period, the number of side-payment
bills that made their way to the House floor is high, though fairly stable.
The data for 1995–98 suggest that under the WTO even more sidepayment bills were used, as our analysis predicts.
Our attention to antitrade groups derives from two related observations. First, although liberalization has been extremely successful in the
postwar period, it has always occurred in the shadow of organized
opposition. Second, groups respond to information about impending
trade talks, which motivates them to pursue particularistic policies. The
existence of continued openness should not be interpreted as an absence of
15

Goldstein 1993.

168

International Law and International Relations

proprotection group pressures. Although proprotection groups may have
been more constrained, had less ‘‘voice,’’ and been balanced by wellorganized exporter groups, once organized, they have powerful effects
on policy.
Has there been a rise in interest-group activity since the creation of the
WTO, as suggested by our analysis? Given the WTO’s brief existence,
assessing the data is difficult. However, as evidenced by the significant
rise in the number of groups attending the WTO’s November 1999 ministerial meeting, the WTO itself has engendered more attention from a
wider range of domestic groups than ever before. For a whole host of
reasons, some associated with legalization, the WTO has become a focus
of attention not only for labor and producer groups, the traditionally interested parties, but also for environmental, health, and safety groups.
Such attention is a result of the expansion of knowledge about what the
WTO is doing as well as structural changes in the scope of the regime.
The regime’s effect on the mobilization of groups may also explain
problems faced in initiating a new round of trade talks. The stated focus
for a new WTO Millennium Round of talks is far more targeted than ever
before; knowledge of who has been targeted has led to more and earlier
activity than in previous rounds. The best exemplar is the agricultural
sector, where good information about the locus of talks led to a crossnational campaign of producers to undercut negotiations.16 These types of
increasing pressures, generated by more information about the liberalization process, will make it more difficult to find nations willing to launch
trade rounds and, for those who do make it to Geneva, more difficult to
make the necessary trade-offs among producers, even if export groups
stay mobilized. After the November 1999 ministerial meeting the fate of
the Millennium Round remains an open question, with most observers
offering pessimistic assessments.
Mobilizing Export Groups
Although the mobilization of groups circumscribes the type of new
deals that are possible, it also explains the stability of signed agreements.
Leaders rarely renege on a GATT trade deal, even when faced with pressure from powerful rent-seeking industries. This stability was not due to
GATT sanctions against such changes. Rather, changing specific tariffs,
according to the rules, was relatively easy under a number of safeguard
16

Josling 1999.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

169

table 8.2. Post-Negotiation Tariff Changes by Invoked
Article for all GATT Members, 1961–90

1961–66d
1967–72
1973–78
1979–84
1985–90
1991–93/94

Open
seasona

Out of
seasonb

Article
28:5c

9
8
5
1
1
4

14
7
3
1
1
1

3
15
31e
66f
19
5

a

Open season refers to the usage and invocation of GATT Art.
XXVIII: 1.
b
Out of season refers to the usage and invocation of GATT Art.
XXVIII: 4.
c
Before the end of a period of ‘‘firm validity,’’ a country may reserve to
modify their schedule. The numbers in this column refer not to the
election of this right, but to its usage (the actual modification).
d
The time periods correspond to two periods of ‘‘firm validity,’’ except
the last time period (1991–93/94) for which we have only three years
of data. Art. XIX data are as of 1 December 1993. Art. XXVIII data
are as of 30 March 1994.
e
Of these cases, 22 are either New Zealand’s or South Africa’s.
f
Of these cases, 32 are South Africa’s.
Source: GATT Analytical Index 1994.

provisions of the GATT regime. Under GATT rules, nations could change
tariffs every three years during the ‘‘open season,’’ in between these times
‘‘out of season,’’ and/or under Article 28:5, as long as the general tariff
level remained the same. Keeping the overall level of tariffs stable, however, was not easy for politicians at home. The problem with giving compensation was the trade-off it created between the group pressing for aid
and some other producer. This type of a trade-off is difficult for politicians.
Table 8.2 shows the use of these provisions for changing particular
tariffs post-negotiation. What is striking is that, although the regime
legally provided a substantial amount of flexibility, these provisions have
only rarely been invoked. Given the thousands of products affected by cuts,
only a few countries rescinded an agreement to bind their tariffs. For
GATT members, these provisions were akin to a Pandora’s Box. Having
to change a schedule, item by item, in the absence of reciprocal benefits
meant trading off one domestic sector for another. The political problems
this engendered assured that few GATT countries chose to deal with
import problems through these means.

170

International Law and International Relations

Another perspective on mobilization is evident in attempts to mobilize export groups in support of free trade by strategically using threats
of retaliation. States making a threat of retaliation that is intended to
mobilize exporters in other countries, such as the United States in
implementing Section 301, must consider how to maximize the pressure
applied by exporters to the other government. Announcing threats of
definite retaliation against just a few groups would not have the desired
effect. These groups would certainly mobilize, but those left off the short
list would not. At the other extreme, announcing a very large or vague
list of possible targets of retaliation would also fail to mobilize many
exporters. This tactic would create massive collective-action problems,
since each exporter would be only part of a potentially universal coalition
and therefore face incentives to free ride. In addition, lack of precision
in the possible targets of retaliation might encourage exporters to wait
and take their chances on being hit, rather than bearing the definite, immediate costs of mobilization.
With these considerations in mind, if our story about mobilization is
correct, the strategic use of retaliatory threats should be quite precise.
In addition, it should target a group of exporters large enough to put
pressure on the government, but not so large as to exacerbate collectiveaction problems. Section 301 cases provide a good source of evidence on
the use of retaliatory threats, since they list the potential targets of
retaliation when the other government does not reach a settlement with
the United States.
* * *
The threat of retaliation, if issued with an appropriate degree of
precision, activates export groups. This suggests that the GATT/WTO
should allow or even encourage retaliation in the face of deviation from
regime rules. The GATT structure, incorporating reciprocal retaliation
and/or alternative market access in response to reneging on a concession,
even under safeguard clauses, may have been better than the alternative
adopted by the WTO. WTO rules waive the right to both compensation
and/or retaliation for the first three years of a safeguard action. Those
who supported the change argued that this would encourage nations to
follow the rules – when nations could defend their reasons for invoking
safeguard actions as ‘‘just,’’ they should be protected from retaliation.17
The logic offered here suggests the opposite. Circumstantial evidence in
17

Krueger 1998.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

171

the United States supports the argument that domestic groups organize
in response to government threats that affect their market position. For
example, in what was supposed to be a simple incidence of using market
restrictions in a Section 301 case, the United States found it politically
impossible to raise tariffs on a Japanese car, the Lexus, in large part
because of resistance from Lexus dealers in the United States. Lexus
dealers are not the type of group that generates great sympathy from
the American people. However, during a trade dispute with Japan that
came to a head in 1995, they found their interests directly at stake. In
an attempt to force more opening of the Japanese market, the United
States announced a list of 100 percent retaliatory tariffs on Japanese
luxury goods that would go into effect on 28 June.18 Since this list included cars with a retail value over $30,000, Lexus dealers (along with
Infiniti and Acura dealers) found themselves directly threatened. In
response they generated a large lobbying and public relations effort. In
the end a midnight deal with Japan averted sanctions.
To summarize, we argue that one of the primary political effects of
legalizing the trade regime will be an interaction between increased
precision about the distributional implications of trade agreements and
the mobilization of domestic groups, both protectionist and free trade in
orientation. In this section we have surveyed evidence on trade negotiations and the use of retaliatory tariffs during trade disputes to see if
mobilization does indeed respond as we expect. From a number of perspectives, we find evidence to support our claims. During negotiations,
lobbying activities are conditioned on the information available to particularistic interests. Strategic politicians, who are attempting to design
the negotiating process so as to increase their ability to create mutually
beneficial bundles of agreements, may find it helpful to have less than
complete transparency about the details of negotiations. Antitrade group
pressures make negotiations more difficult, and to the extent that transparency encourages mobilization of antitrade groups it will hinder
liberalization negotiations.19 During trade disputes, politicians similarly
strategize about how to reveal information so as to mobilize groups
appropriately – in this instance to maximize the mobilization of exporters
in the target country.
Our findings should not be interpreted as a prediction of trade closure.
Rather, we make the more modest claim that attention should be paid to
18
19

New York Times, 9 June 1995, D3.
See, for example, the history of agricultural trade in Josling 1999.

172

International Law and International Relations

an underexplored effect of international legalization, that is, the mobilization of domestic groups. The analysis of the interaction of legalization, information, and domestic groups is a requisite to understanding the
conditions under which legalization of the trade regime will be successful.

tightly binding trade rules
In the preceding section we argued that legalization enriches the information environment. In this section we examine a second effect of legalization linked to an increase in the obligatory nature of international
rules. Legalization at its core refers to pacta sunt servanda, or the presumption that, once signed, nations will adhere to treaty obligations.
Interpretations of this responsibility are typically rendered by lawyers
using a discourse focusing on rules – their exceptions and applicability –
and not on interests. Given the expanding breadth of the trade regime, we
suggest that the use of legal rule interpretation has made it increasingly
difficult for governments to get around obligations by invoking escape
clauses and safeguards or by turning to alternative measures, such as
nontariff barriers. Partly, this is a result of the increased precision of rules
and the inclusion of what were extralegal trade remedies, such as
voluntary export restraints, in the regime itself. But the legalization of
the trade regime has also moved the nexus of both rule making and
adjudicating rule violations into the center of the regime and away from
member states.
The Logic of ‘‘Bindingness’’
The benefits of increased precision and ‘‘bindingness’’ are identified in
the functionalist literature on international institutions.20 The benefit of
international institutions lies primarily in the creation of disincentives for
states to behave opportunistically by reneging on trade agreements and
acting unilaterally. The problem of incentives to renege on cooperative
arrangements, and the role of international institutions in helping states
20

We use the term bindingness where the term obligation would seem appropriate to
a political scientist. The reason is that obligation has taken on a particular legal meaning,
and that meaning has been adopted in this issue. By bindingness we mean the political
obligation created by international rules. It is a positive rather than a normative term,
meaning the degree to which rules are binding, practically speaking, on governments.
Rules with higher probability of enforcement, for example, are more binding (or
obligatory) in this political sense.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

173

to overcome these incentives and so reach Pareto-superior outcomes, has
been central to the institutional approach to international relations.21
The key institutional argument is that attaining cooperative outcomes is
hindered by the lack of information about the intentions and behavior
of others and ambiguity about international obligations that states can
manipulate to their advantage. States are often caught in a ‘‘prisoners’
dilemma’’ and find it difficult to sustain the necessary enforcement strategies to assure cooperation in the uncertain environment of international
politics. The primary function of international institutions, therefore, is
to provide politically relevant information and so allow states to escape
from the prisoners’ dilemma trap.
This argument about international institutions took shape during an
era when researchers were anxious to extend their analysis beyond formal international organizations to informal institutions and regimes.22
By focusing on legalization, the current project returns to the study of
formal institutions, but the underlying logic remains the same. Making
international commitments precise and explicit makes it more difficult
for states to evade them without paying a cost. More precise rules allow
for more effective enforcement, and legalization involves a process of
increasing precision. Greater precision and transparency about the obligations and behavior of states are also created by other dimensions
of legalization. Delegation of monitoring and dispute-resolution functions to centralized organizational agents, away from member states, is
intended to increase the quantity and quality of information about state
behavior. It therefore leads to more effective enforcement and disincentives to renege on commitments.
As we have argued, legalization has unintended effects on the mobilization of support for and against trade liberalization. Similarly, legal binding
has unexpected effects on domestic politics. If agreements are impossible
to breach, either because of their level of obligation or because the transparency of rules increases the likelihood of enforcement, elected officials
may find that the costs of signing such agreements outweigh the benefits.
The downside of increased legalization in this instance lies in the inevitable uncertainties of economic interactions between states and in the need
for flexibility to deal with such uncertainty without undermining the trade
regime as a whole. Legalization as increased bindingness could therefore
constrain leaders and undermine free-trade majorities at home.
21
22

Keohane 1984.
Krasner 1983.

174

International Law and International Relations
* * *

The existence of uncertainty about the costs of trade agreements on the
domestic level suggests that fully legalized procedures that apply high,
deterministic penalties for noncompliance could backfire, leading to an
unraveling of the process of liberalization.23 Under some conditions it will
be inefficient for actors to live up to the letter of the law in their commitments to one another, such as when alternative arrangements exist
that increase mutual gains.24 These alternative arrangements generally
involve temporary deviations from the rules with compensation offered
to the other party. The problem is to write agreements that recognize the
possibility of breach but limit it to the appropriate context, such as when
economic shocks occur and all will be better off by temporarily allowing
deviation from rules.
At the same time, of course, writing agreements that provide the necessary flexibility creates a moral-hazard problem. If the circumstances
that demand temporary deviation are not perfectly observable to other
actors, parties will be tempted to cheat. Cheating in this instance would
consist of a demand to stretch the rules for a while, which all would benefit
from, because of an unanticipated shock, when in fact the actor is simply
attempting to get out of inconvenient commitments. Such opportunistic
behavior is a constant concern in strategic settings with asymmetric
information. In the context of the GATT/WTO, the primary reasons that
flexibility is necessary lie in the uncertainties of domestic politics. Flexibility or ‘‘imperfection’’ can lead to stability and success of trade agreements, but incentives also exist for states to evade commitments even when
economic conditions do not justify evasion.
The enforcement structures of the GATT/WTO thus face a difficult
dilemma: to allow states to deviate from commitments when doing so
would be efficient but to deter abuse of this flexibility. If enforcement is
too harsh, states will comply with trade rules even in the face of high
economic and political costs, and general support for liberalization is
likely to decline. On the other hand, if enforcement is too lax, states will
cheat, leading to a different dynamic that could similarly undermine
the system. Downs and Rocke, drawing on game-theoretic models, suggest that imperfection in the enforcement mechanism is the appropriate
23

24

Contract law recognizes the same dynamic of uncertainty requiring flexibility in contracts, under the heading of efficient breach. See Roessler, Schwartz, and Sykes 1997, 7.
The idea is similar to that behind the Coase theorem: efficient agreements are reached
through the mechanism of one party compensating another.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

175

response. Punishment for infractions of GATT commitments should be
probabilistic rather than deterministic.
Changes in WTO procedures have made penalties for rule violation
more certain and less probabilistic. At this point, it is difficult to say
whether negotiators went too far in limiting the availability of safeguards.25 However, we can point out one unanticipated effect of the
tightening of safeguards that both ties this analysis to our earlier
discussion of trade negotiations and generates predictions about future
attempts to further liberalize trade. There is a direct connection between
states’ access to safeguard provisions and their stance during trade
negotiations. Domestic interests can anticipate the effects of eliminating
safeguards and so will bring more pressure to bear on governments during
negotiations.26 Those who fear the possibility of adverse economic
shocks without the protection of an escape clause will be highly resistant
to inclusion in liberalization. In response they will demand exclusion or,
at a minimum, side payments if their sector is included in liberalizing
efforts. Thus extensive tightening of safeguard provisions will lead to
tougher, more disaggregated negotiations as some groups lobby strenuously for exclusion. The rise in the use of voluntary export restraints and
antidumping and countervailing duty cases is almost certainly a result of
this difficulty in using safeguards. It is also likely that more bindingness
has led to increases in the side payments governments are forced to make
to groups in order to buy their support for trade agreements. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the North American Free Trade Agreement, a highly
legalized trade agreement, could only gain approval in the United States
after extensive use of side payments by the government.27
* * *
Few analysts dispute that the old trade regime was tremendously
effective in reducing impediments to trade. Nevertheless, analysts and
legal scholars involved in the GATT expressed dissatisfaction about many
of its procedures and capacities. One concern was that the disputeresolution procedures seemed to have a fatal flaw, in that member states
could undermine the creation of dispute-resolution panels as well as any
decision that went against them. Another concern was that powerful
25

26
27

As we argue later, the safeguard reforms are counterintuitive for two reasons. First, they
may be too difficult to invoke, undercutting their purpose. Second, since retaliation is
limited, the stability evoked by activating export groups may have been undermined.
See also Sykes 1991, 259.
Hufbauer and Schott 1993.

176

International Law and International Relations

states, particularly the United States, evaded GATT regulations when
convenient. As the United States increasingly turned to unilateral remedies
for perceived trade infractions, such as Section 301, other members grew
increasingly concerned that the GATT was powerless in preventing unilateralism and not strong enough to provide effective enforcement.
The remedy to these problems, both in theory and in practice, was
greater legalization of the GATT. As the GATT evolved into the more
formal WTO, the dispute-resolution procedures were made more legal in
nature and the organization gained enhanced oversight and monitoring
authority. Multilateral rules of trade extended into new and difficult areas,
such as intellectual property, and substituted for unilateral practices. The
procedures for retaliation and compensation were made more precise
and limiting. The process of negotiating the content of rules – including
provisions for addressing rule breaches – led to greater precision.28 In the
next sections we evaluate these changes, asking whether or not the
changes portend greater trade liberalization. Our inquiry centers on two
questions. First, we ask whether the legal framework allows states to
abrogate a contract when doing so would be mutually beneficial. Second,
we examine the functioning of the dispute-resolution mechanism.
* * *

Exceptions and Escape Clauses
Trade legalization has constrained states by curtailing their ability to
utilize safeguards and exceptions. The issue of exceptions, their status
and use, has loomed large in many of the rounds of GATT negotiations.
Pressure from import-competing groups is strong everywhere, although
domestic institutional arrangements vary in how well they can ‘‘buy off’’
or ignore this resistance. The United States, for example, has been notorious for both retaining protection on the upper part of its schedule and
for making particular industry side payments before even arriving in
Geneva. The United States is also responsible for the inclusion of an escape clause into the GATT’s original design, reflecting a desire by Congress
to maintain its prerogative to renege on a trade deal if necessary.29
Legalization of the regime has resulted in a tightening in the use of
safeguard provisions, including the escape clause. Under Article XIX,
28
29

On the extent of changes in the WTO, see Krueger 1998.
Goldstein 1993.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

177

a country is allowed to increase protection for a home industry if a past
tariff concession does damage to it.30 If a country backs out of an agreement or imposes some additional trade restriction, it must be applied in
a nondiscriminatory way; that is, countries whose exports are not hurting your industry cannot retain a preferential position.31 When the provision is used, other countries are allowed to retaliate by reducing an
equivalent amount of concession; otherwise the country imposing Article
XIX must reduce tariffs on other products, equivalent to the amount of
the original concession.
Two important domestic groups are potentially affected by these limitations on the use of safeguards. If nations retaliate, exporters suffer; if
the government compensates, some import-competing industry will feel
increased competition. Unless offered some side payment, industries have
a strong incentive to have their political representative veto their inclusion into the compensatory package. Thus both the threat of retaliation
and the difficulty of reassigning tariff reductions should constrain countries from raising trade barriers as allowed under Article XIX. The logic
here is consistent with that offered in the preceding section.
The data on Article XIX provide support for the argument that using
this provision is difficult in practice. Table 8.3 shows the aggregate use
of the escape clause for all GATT members. Since the 1960s, Article XIX
has been invoked at a relatively consistent rate. Given increasing levels of
trade, stable numbers of Article XIX invocations imply declining use of
this mechanism. As with the safeguard measures listed in Table 8.2, the
small number of cases, compared with the significant number of industries affected by changing tariffs, should be attributed to the difficult
time countries have both with the potential for retaliation and with compensating nations through alternative tariff reductions. This difficulty
explains the trend toward alternative methods of protection, such as
‘‘administered protection’’ in the form of subsidies and antidumping and
countervailing duty provisions.32 Nontariff barriers, though not often
30

31

32

‘‘Tariff concessions and unforeseen developments must have caused an absolute or
relative increase in imports which in turn causes or threatens serious injury to domestic
producers . . . of like or directly competitive goods.’’ Although the invoking party is not
saddled with the burden of proving that it has met these requirements, the requirements
nonetheless have deterred countries from invoking the escape clause.
This often leads to a situation where the producers causing the problems in the first
place could remain in a competitive position with the higher-cost home producer. The
producers who get penalized are the middle-price traders who were not the problem.
Shonfield 1976, 224.
Baldwin 1998.

International Law and International Relations

178

table 8.3. Use of Escape Clause by all GATT Members,
1950–94

1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990sa

Average number
of cases per year

Nontariff barrier
remedies as percentage
of total uses

1.9
3.5
4.7
3.7
1.2

26
56
70
51
75

a

Data for the 1990s ran only from 1990 to 1 December 1993.
Source: GATT Analytical Index 1994.

used in the 1950s, were, by the 1970s, used by most countries to circumvent problems with GATT rules. Licenses, quotas, and voluntary export
restraints were all means to finesse the potential problems at home with
the GATT compensatory system.
Overall, the figures in Tables 8.2 and 8.3 suggest that use of the legally
available mechanisms of flexibility in the trade regime is heavily circumscribed by the interaction of the legal provisions for their use and political
realities. The increasing extent to which governments are bound by the
lack of realistic escape clauses is apparent when we examine the use of
compensation. Although the use of safeguards has been relatively constant,
compensation or retaliation in response to the invocation of a safeguard
provision was more common in the earlier years – ten cases from 1950 to
1959, ten cases from 1960 to 1969, six cases in the 1970s, and three cases
in the 1980s.33
Use of compensation and retaliation was concentrated. The United
States accounted for twelve of the twenty cases between 1950 and 1970
but only one case thereafter. Australia accounted for seven of the sixteen
cases between 1960 and 1980. Although American use of Article XIX
did not decline until the 1980s, the kind of remedy administrators chose
to use did shift over time. Compensation could occur through reducing tariff barriers elsewhere. However, this would hurt other importcompeting groups, so the compensation mechanism of Article XIX is
unwieldy if these groups are organized. At the same time, rescinding tariff
33

GATT Analytical Index, various issues.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

179

concessions without compensation opens exporters to the threat of retaliation. For these reasons, the United States had moved toward a nontariff barrier remedy by the late 1960s. The change was rather dramatic.
In the early years of the regime, between 1950 and 1969, the United
States compensated for a tariff hike over 93 percent of the time.34
Thereafter, both the use of compensation and the number of invocations
declined precipitously.
Overall, the evidence on the use of safeguards and compensation suggests that strict legal provisions were not necessary to maintain openness.
The pattern of use of safeguard provisions in the GATT suggests that
the regime gained in politically relevant bindingness, even when in legal
terms the obligatory nature of rules did not change. Still, the WTO reforms attempted to clarify and make more stringent the requirements
for using safeguards. Drawing on the discussion of economic uncertainty
and the need for flexibility in light of the data, we suggest that increased
stringency in safeguard use may be misplaced. In fact, even the GATT
provisions could be interpreted to have become too tightly binding, not
allowing the necessary temporary deviations from rules that contribute to
long-term stability. Escape clauses, safeguards, and the like are the legal
mechanisms for dealing with a world of economic uncertainty. The
provisions for their use must be heavily constrained, so as to reduce the
chance that states will invoke them opportunistically. However, it appears
that these constraints, interacting with domestic politics, may bind states
more tightly than intended.
Our cautionary note may explain why the WTO chose to forestall
retaliation for three years in cases where a safeguard provision was
sanctioned. Yet the choice of this tool to deal with overbinding may be
a problem. Given the logic offered in the preceding section, we suggest that
nations abide by their trade agreements because the threat of retaliation
mobilizes export groups to counter rent-seeking producer groups. Similarly, our analysis suggests that the mobilization of groups favored those
who support openness, which, in turn, deterred states from using even
legal exceptions. Given the logic of domestic politics, it is hard to know
whether the benefits of this new rule in terms of flexibility will outweigh
its effects on the balance between pro- and antitrade groups in WTO
members.

34

The United States invoked Article XIX fourteen times between 1950 and 1969. Of these
they used nontariff barriers alone in only one case.

180

International Law and International Relations
Dispute Settlement

One of the major innovations of the WTO was to strengthen the disputeresolution mechanism. States have lost the ability to wield a veto, which
they used under the GATT to protect themselves against GATT-approved
retaliation. In effect, residual rights of control have been shifted from
states to the WTO, convened as the Dispute Settlement Body. According
to proponents of the new system, the existence of veto power encouraged
opportunism, whereas not having veto power deters such behavior. If
this is the case, we should see predictable effects in the pattern of disputes
brought to the WTO.
We suggest that the GATT dispute-settlement structure, by being
more attentive to the realities of power and an uncertain economic environment, but also by providing publicity and possible sanctions when
states blatantly disregarded regime rules, may have optimized the tradeoff between constraint and flexibility that liberalization requires. As a
way to examine this hypothesis, we ask whether the pattern of disputes
has changed under the WTO in the manner predicted by the logic of reducing opportunism. The strong theoretical argument in favor of legalization claims that legalization is necessary to prevent opportunistic
behavior. If we find that the incidence of opportunism has not changed
in the face of increasing legalization, the argument in favor of legalization loses much of its force.35
If the primary effect of further legalization in dispute settlement is
reducing opportunism, it should appear in the data as reduced political
manipulation of the regime. Eliminating the power to veto should have
observable effects on the activities of states and the outcome of disputes.
Political scientists are producing a burgeoning literature on GATT/WTO
dispute settlement, using sophisticated statistical techniques. However,
this literature, regardless of the techniques involved, cannot escape problems of selection bias, since states chose whether to bring disputes and
at what stage to resolve them. Here we suggest a few simple hypotheses about how the pattern of disputes should change with legalization if
its major effect is a reduction in opportunism. If the data do not support these simple hypotheses, the case for legalization is substantially
weakened.

35

We assume a goal of reducing opportunism on theoretical grounds, without claiming that
all negotiators had precisely this goal in mind. Certainly the agendas of negotiators were
diverse, and reducing opportunism was only one goal among many.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

181

Adopting the unitary state/opportunism model, we derive propositions about how legalization should influence patterns of disputes. Assuming the problem of opportunism suggests that the loss of veto power
should have two primary effects: a deterrent effect and a distributive effect.
States will behave strategically both in deciding when to bring disputes
and whether to comply preemptively so that others have no cause to bring
a dispute. This two-sided strategic behavior could render many predictions indeterminate. To identify refutable hypotheses, we focus on
expected changes in the relative behavior of developed and developing
states. Since both are subject to the same incentives in deciding whether to
comply with changes in GATT/WTO rules, changes in the proportions of
disputes brought are likely caused by changed calculations about the
chances of success in a dispute and not by changed patterns of compliance.
Although developing countries have more trade restrictions than developed countries, the marginal impact of new dispute-resolution procedures on compliance decisions should be the same for both. In addition,
we concentrate on just the first few years of experience under the WTO
rules. Since states can change their behavior in bringing disputes more
quickly than they can change their basic trade regulations, the patterns
we observe should be due primarily to calculations about whether bringing
disputes is worthwhile, not fundamental changes in compliance.
A deterrent effect refers to the likelihood that the existence of veto
power would deter states from bringing disputes. Bringing a formal dispute is costly and time consuming, and states could calculate that doing
so is not worth the trouble if the powerful will simply veto any decision
that goes against them. Thus we generate a deterrence hypothesis: the existence of veto power deters some states from bringing disputes, and with
the loss of veto power these states are no longer deterred.
In order to collect data relevant to this general hypothesis, we need to
derive some observable implications from it. We do so on the assumption
that the intent of legalizing dispute-resolution procedures is to reduce
opportunistic behavior by powerful states such as the United States.36
One implication is that, since powerful states can no longer veto decisions
that go against them, we should expect the proportion of complaints
against developed countries to rise under the WTO (hypothesis 1). If states
were deterred from bringing complaints against the powerful because of
the existence of the veto, then such complaints should have a higher
probability of success as a result of the loss of the veto. Therefore, we
36

Jackson 1998.

182

International Law and International Relations

should see more disputes brought against the powerful. This should be
true even if states are, for strategic reasons, complying more fully under
the WTO. Better compliance should hold for both developed and developing states; there is no reason to expect the proportion of disputes against
the powerful to change as a result of changes in compliance patterns.
Second, since less powerful countries may now have a greater chance of
having decisions in their favor implemented, we should see developing
countries increasingly bringing complaints (hypothesis 2). Simply put, the
deterrence hypothesis suggests that under the WTO, weak states should
no longer be deterred. Like hypothesis 1, hypothesis 2 should hold even
if patterns of compliance have improved, since improved compliance
should hold for both developed and developing states. There is no reason
to expect strategic compliance behavior to lead to a change in the proportion of disputes brought by developing countries.
Finally, a process marred by opportunism should be most evident in
relations between powerful and weak states. Thus a third implication of
the deterrence hypothesis is that we should see an increase in the proportion of cases brought by developing countries against developed countries (hypothesis 3). As the WTO depoliticizes trade and so encourages
the less powerful to demand their legal rights, we should see more of these
‘‘asymmetric’’ disputes.
The evidence on these three hypotheses about deterrent effects is
mixed.37 Regarding hypothesis 1, of the complaints raised under the
GATT through 1989, 87 percent were brought against developed states.38
Under the WTO, this percentage has dropped, contrary to the expectation
from the opportunism perspective, to 64 percent. This is likely a result of
the expansion of regime rules to cover more developing-country trade.
The high percentage of complaints brought under the GATT against
developed states is not surprising, considering the value of their market
for other states. Yet it indicates that the power to veto did not allow
powerful states to deter others from bringing complaints against them.
This finding suggests that the GATT, in spite of the decentralized nature
of its dispute-resolution process, was able to constrain the behavior of
developed countries, as Hudec also concludes.39 Preventing opportunism
does not require high levels of legalization.

37

38
39

For a more thorough examination of patterns of disputes in the GATT and the WTO, see.
Hudec 1999; and Sevilla 1998.
Hudec 1993, 297.
Hudec 1999.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

183

Hypothesis 2 posits that developing countries will be more likely to
use the WTO procedures than they were to use the GATT mechanism. If
this is true, we should see the percentage of complaints brought by developing countries rising under the WTO. This prediction holds up better
than the first. Under the GATT (through 1989), only 19 percent of complaints were brought by developing countries.40 This number has risen
to 33 percent in the first few years that the WTO mechanisms have been
in effect. However, considering the evidence just discussed on the identity of defendants, it seems likely that this increased reliance on the
dispute-resolution mechanism reflects some dynamic other than a decreased ability of the powerful to deter complaints against themselves. In
particular, it seems likely that increased legalization has reduced the costs
of bringing suits, thus making it more frequently worth the cost of
bringing a complaint for poor states, regardless of the identity of the
defendant.41 In other words, legalization has encouraged weaker states to
bring more complaints, generally because doing so is easier, not because
the powerful will no longer veto them.
Hypothesis 3 predicts an increase in the number of complaints brought
by developing countries against developed countries under the WTO. This
hypothesis fares badly, because the data show that under the GATT
developing countries targeted almost solely the rich world in their disputes. Hudec’s data show almost no cases of developing countries bringing complaints against one another. The exceptions are disputes between
India and Pakistan. In contrast, the twenty complaints brought by developing countries so far under the WTO have been just about evenly
divided between targeting the developed and developing world. Two factors might explain this finding. First, the costs of bringing disputes are
now lower, so it is more often worthwhile to bring them against developing countries. Second, the Uruguay Round extended many trade rules to
developing countries, so the dispute-resolution procedures can be used
against them for the first time. Regardless of the particular mechanism at
work, the pattern of complaints shows that the major change under the
WTO procedures has been an increased willingness of developing countries to bring complaints against one another. This effect is not consistent
with reduced opportunism.
If legalization reduces opportunism as intended, a second effect that
should result from eliminating the veto power is enhanced equity in the
40
41

Hudec 1993, 296.
Sevilla 1998.

184

International Law and International Relations

outcomes of disputes. We can formalize this as a fourth hypothesis: legalization of dispute resolution has reduced the bias toward the powerful
in the settlement of disputes (hypothesis 4). A distributive effect could
be estimated by comparing the outcomes of disputes brought under the
GATT versus under the WTO. Unfortunately, since few cases have yet
been resolved under the WTO, we can say nothing definitive on this issue.
However, we can look at dispute outcomes under the GATT to see if
they tended to favor developed countries as expected. If the weakly legalized GATT mechanisms encouraged opportunism, this trend should appear as a bias toward the powerful in the outcomes of disputes under
the GATT. Eric Reinhardt has provided a careful statistical study of the
factors determining the distributive outcomes of GATT disputes.42 He
tests the hypothesis that powerful states tend to get a larger share of
the benefits of resolved disputes. Employing a number of alternative
operationalizations, Reinhardt found no evidence that asymmetries of
power work in favor of the powerful. Instead, he found a bias in favor of
defendants, regardless of power asymmetries.
As with the data on the choice to bring complaints, in looking at the
outcomes of disputes we find little evidence that the GATT operated in an
overtly politicized manner, with powerful states using the GATT disputeresolution procedures to deter weaker states from bringing complaints or
to force outcomes of disputes to favor the powerful. The GATT, in spite
of its weak level of legalization, provided many of the benefits we expect
to see from international institutions. It discouraged opportunism without a resort to highly legalized mechanisms. This finding raises further
questions about the benefits that states will be able to derive from further
legalization.
Improving the compliance of powerful states with their explicit obligations under the rules of international trade was one of the primary
motivations behind the enhanced dispute-resolution mechanisms of the
WTO. Thus moving from a politicized process to a more legalized one
should have an observable impact on the behavior of powerful states.
However, the evidence is weak that the WTO has made the difference
intended by proponents of more legalized dispute-resolution procedures.
While developing countries appear more willing to lodge formal complaints than they were previously, the complaints do not target the
behavior of powerful states any more than they did before. One plausible
interpretation of the evidence on the number of complaints being brought
42

Reinhardt 1995.

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

185

is that the GATT was in fact quite influential in constraining powerful
states, leading us to ask how much value will be added by increased
legalization. Considering the drawbacks of increased legalization discussed earlier, the benefits must be clear in order to justify further moves
in this direction. Dispute outcomes do not show evidence of coercion by
powerful states, consistent with the idea that the political sensitivity of
the GATT was not as much of an impediment to liberalization as legalization proponents presumed.

conclusion
This article was motivated by questions about the relationship between
international legalization and trade. The benefits of legalization lie in the
fact that the more efficiently a regime provides information, reduces transaction costs, and monitors member behavior, the harder it is for a unitary state to behave opportunistically and renege on trade agreements.
However, an analysis of the domestic requisites of free trade suggests
potential negative effects of legalization that must be weighed against its
benefits. When we consider cooperation with the trade regime to be a
function of the interests of domestic political actors, the assumption that
increased legalization leads to more trade openness becomes questionable. Although we cannot demonstrate that legalization has gone so far
that it threatens liberalization, we do wish to sound a cautionary note
based in the impact of legalization on the mobilization of protectionist
groups.
We examined three theoretical issues implicated by the legalization of
the trade regime. First, we asked how greater precision at the time of
negotiating treaties changes the incentives of antitrade groups to mobilize. In that legalization leads to more and better information about the
distributional effects of proposed agreements, we suggested that it could
actually deter the conclusion of cooperative deals. Faced with certainty
of loss, the expected utility of a group’s organizing increases, suggesting
that negotiators could find themselves confronted by powerful veto
groups, undermining their ability to construct a majority in favor of a
treaty. This dynamic of information provided by a legalized regime leading to massive mobilization may help explain the level of social activism
at the 1999 WTO meetings in Seattle.
Second, we applied the same logic of information and mobilization to
expectations about the maintenance of agreements already in force. The
logic of information here predicted a different outcome from that during

186

International Law and International Relations

negotiations. By focusing on the incentives of exporters, we argued that
when exporters know that they are likely targets of retaliation, they are
more motivated to organize in support of the trade regime than those
subject to an imprecise threat of retaliation. Thus the prediction about
the effect of changes in the information environment varies, depending
upon whether we are considering the expansion of trade liberalization
or compliance with enacted treaties.
Finally, we looked at the effects of a system of highly deterministic
penalties on domestic actors. Here we suggested that trade regimes need
to incorporate some flexibility in their enforcement procedures; too little
enforcement may encourage opportunism, but too much may backfire,
undermining the ability of domestic actors to find support for an open
trade policy. By decreasing the ability to breach agreements, WTO negotiators may have underestimated the inherently uncertain character of
the international economy and so the need to allow practical flexibility in
enforcement of regime rules.
* * *
Given the short history of the WTO, the empirical support for our
theoretical arguments is inconclusive. Still, evidence suggests that the
effects of legalization may not be as glowing as proponents argue. First,
legalization may be one reason for the increased attention and activity of
antitrade groups. We cannot say whether this will deter nations from
further liberalization, since policy will ultimately depend on the balance
of national forces between pro- and antitrade groups. Still, it is clear that
those groups who are targeted for liberalization in the new round of
discussions have become active proponents of particularistic policies.
Second, some evidence suggests that changes in WTO rules undermine
the incentive for export groups to mobilize in defense of free trade. In
that the WTO makes retaliation more difficult, both because of changes in
the rules on safeguard provisions and because of the process of dispute
resolution, we expect exporters to mobilize less often to balance the
action of rent-seeking import-competing groups.
Consideration of the effect of the more precise and binding safeguard
and dispute-settlement provisions also raises questions about the turn toward legalization. Given the difficulty of their use, few countries turned
to GATT safeguards, choosing instead alternative methods to deal with
difficulties in compliance. Making these safeguards more difficult to use
may have been both unnecessary and counterproductive – if countries
found it necessary to turn to alternative mechanisms to deal with the

Legalization, Trade Liberalization, and Domestic Politics

187

political effects of market dislocation before, the change in rules on
safeguards does little to solve the underlying problem. Similarly, our
investigation of the WTO dispute-settlement mechanism gives us little
reason to think that legalization in the realm of settling disputes will have
significant effects on trade compliance. The GATT system was relatively
effective at deterring opportunism, in spite of its political nature.
The source of stability of trade agreements is found in domestic political mechanisms. The rules of the regime influence countries by making it
easier or harder to find majority support for trade openness; if the regime supports rules that are unhelpful to politicians at home, it may well
undercut its own purpose. Thus the legalization of international trade
could turn on itself if analysis of the benefits of legalization neglects
associated political costs. Thomas Franck has argued that the greater the
‘‘determinacy’’ of a rule, the more legitimate it becomes.43 Determinacy,
however, may be of greater value to lawyers than to politicians, whose
interests in trade liberalization will be constrained by elections. Elected
officials face a dilemma. If there is too little formalism in international
trade rules, politicians will be unable to commit for fear of opportunism
by others; too much formalism and they lose their ability to opt out of
the regime temporarily during especially intense political opposition or
tough economic times. Analyses of legalization that focus on maximizing state compliance neglect complex domestic political dynamics. It is
well possible that attempts to maximize compliance through legalization
will have the unintended effect of mobilizing domestic groups opposed to
free trade, thus undermining hard-won patterns of cooperation and the
expansion of trade.
43

Franck 1995.

9
Alternatives to ‘‘Legalization’’: Richer Views
of Law and Politics
Martha Finnemore and Stephen J. Toope

The authors of ‘‘Legalization and World Politics’’ (special issue of IO,
summer 2000) have done an excellent job connecting one branch of
thinking about international law (rooted in the legal theory of H. L. A.
Hart) to one branch of thinking about international politics (neoliberal
institutionalism).1 However, the connections between the two disciplines
are broader and deeper than the volume indicates. International legal
scholars have long understood that international law is more than the
formal, treaty-based law on which the volume’s authors focus their work.
Law is a broad social phenomenon deeply embedded in the practices,
beliefs, and traditions of societies, and shaped by interaction among
societies.2 Customary international law displays this richer understanding of law’s operation as does the increasingly large body of what has
been termed ‘‘interstitial law,’’ that is, the implicit rules operating in and
around explicit normative frameworks.3 Similarly, legal pluralist analysis of domestic and international legal systems focuses on the interaction
of overlapping state and nonstate normative systems.4
We show how a fuller appreciation of what international law is and
how it influences behavior allows room for a wealth of intellectual connections between international legal scholarship and research in international
1
2
3
4

International Organization 54, 3, Summer 2000.
Glenn 2000.
Lowe 2000.
See Walzer 1983; and Macdonald 1998.

We thank Jutta Brunne´e, H. P. Glenn, Rod Macdonald, Rene´ Provost, Bob Wolfe, participants in the University of Chicago Law School International Law Workshop, two anonymous reviewers, and the editors of IO for helpful comments on an earlier draft.

188

Alternatives to Legalization

189

relations – connections that are not evident from the framing of the
‘‘legalization’’ phenomenon in the IO volume. *** Narrow and stylized
frameworks like this one may be useful if they provide conceptual clarity
and facilitate operationalization of concepts. However, the empirical
applications of legalization in the volume suggest the opposite: the
articles reveal that the concept of legalization as defined in the volume
is peripheral, in need of revision, or generates hypotheses that are
wrong. ***

a richer view of international law
The framers of the volume are careful in defining their terms. Legalization
refers to a specific set of characteristics that institutions may (or may not)
possess: obligation, precision, and delegation.5 Each of these characterizations may be present in varying degrees along a continuum, and each
can vary independently of the others. This attention to definitions is
helpful and lends coherence to the volume, but appropriating the
general term legalization for only a few features of the law is misleading. It suggests that law is and can only be this limited collection of
formalized and institutionalized features. The phenomenon the authors
investigate might more accurately be termed legal bureaucratization,
since it seems to involve the structural manifestations of law in public
bureaucracies. *** Without a broader view of law that causes us to pay
attention to legal procedures, methodologies, institutions, and processes
generating legitimacy, the authors’ three components of legalization lack
theoretical coherence and raise more questions than they answer, as
we show.
* * *
The view of law presented in the volume, though important, is limited.
In it, law is constructed primarily through cases and courts, or through
formal treaty negotiation. The processes of law are viewed overwhelmingly as processes of dispute resolution, mostly within formal institutionalized contexts. The ‘‘international legal actions’’ chosen in the volume’s
introduction to epitomize the phenomenon of legalization are mainly
examples of tribunal decisions. The secondary evidence of legalization is
drawn exclusively from explicit obligations imposed by treaties.6 Law
5
6

Abbott et al. 2000, 401.
Goldstein et al. 2000, 385–86.

190

International Law and International Relations

in this view is constraint only; it has no creative or generative powers
in social life. Yet law working in the world constitutes relationships as
much as it delimits acceptable behavior. The very idea of state sovereignty, both a legal and a political construction, creates the context that
allows for the formal articulation of treaty rules.7 Similarly, property
rights, over which political actors battle in many of the volume’s articles,
are themselves dynamic constructions generated by law. Oddly, given this
group of authors, even the role of formal law in creating and shaping the
life of institutions like the IMF, GATT, and WTO, explicitly addressed in
the volume, is neglected. Theirs is an overwhelmingly liberal and positivist view of law. It is also limited to the bureaucratic formalism
described by Weber and so is very ‘‘Western’’ in a narrow sense.8 We are
not implying that Western law, positivism, and liberalism are uninteresting theoretical frameworks, but an analysis of the role of law in world
politics that is entirely constrained by these three optics, attending primarily to formal institutions, is at best partial.9
Despite the efforts of the framers of the volume to define terms and to
expressly bracket issues, at the end of the day it is difficult to decide exactly
what the authors have set out to demonstrate and what analytic work their
concept of legalization is supposed to accomplish. Is legalization a dependent variable or an independent one? *** If legalization is a phenomenon
to be explained, what other factors might explain it, and how important
are they? If legalization explains aspects of state behavior, what other
independent variables should be considered in assessing legalization’s role,
and how might these interact with legalization?10 Equally important for
the authors, do the three defining features of legalization all have the same
causes, or cause the same effects, and how would we know if they did (or
did not)? ***

7
8
9

10

Biersteker and Weber 1996.
Glenn 2000.
For a helpful categorization of various legal theories as they relate to the question of
compliance, see Kingsbury 1998. Among the competing theories of international law
(and particularly of international obligation) that are not included within the volume’s
concept of legalization are the ‘‘world constitutive process’’ model of the Yale School
(Lasswell and McDougal 1971; Reisman 1992), natural law approaches (Verdross and
Koeck 1983), the ‘‘transnational legal process’’ model of Harold Koh (Koh 1997), the
‘‘interactional’’ framework of Brunne´e and Toope (Brunne´e and Toope 2000), and the
rigorously rationalistic law and economics approach of Goldsmith and Posner (Goldsmith and Posner 1999).
See Abbott and Snidal 2000; see also Abbott et al. 2000.

Alternatives to Legalization

191

Three Lacunae
Political scientists have understood for decades that formal institutions
do not capture many of the most important features of politics. Indeed,
the authors of this volume have a fairly broad, and by now standard, political science definition of institutions, one that focuses attention beyond
their formal attributes. Institutions are ‘‘rules, norms, and decisionmaking procedures’’ that shape expectations, interests, and behavior.11
Marrying such a broad understanding of institutions to a narrow and
formal understanding of law seems both unfortunate and unnecessary. A
fuller understanding of law would complement our more nuanced
understanding of institutions and produce a richer joint research agenda.
To illustrate, we discuss three interrelated features of international law
neglected in the volume; these features are central to understanding its
effects on world politics and, further, are crucial to a theoretically
defensible understanding of the very specific legalization phenomenon
the volume’s authors employ.
Custom
The most obvious casualty of the volume’s narrow framing of legalization
is customary international law, with which it almost completely fails to
engage. Any assessment of law’s persuasive influence that neglects to treat
seriously the customary law elements of such topics as state responsibility, legal personality, territory, human rights, and the use of force is bound
to produce a skewed perspective. For example, customary law on the use
of force stands alongside, complements, and even modifies treaty-based
norms.12 Although the UN Charter and humanitarian law treaties establish an explicit framework of norms circumscribing the use of force
in international relations, no one analyzing this issue-area can afford to
ignore the customary law of self-defense or the impact of the concept of
jus cogens (peremptory norms) on the attitudes of states toward the
legitimate use of force.13 It is not surprising that the volume contains
but the briefest discussion of security issues, for they simply cannot fit
within a narrow judicial and treaty-based perspective on law’s influence
in world affairs.14 Similarly, in the area of human rights, the broadening
11
12
13
14

Goldstein et al. 2000, 387.
Nicaragua v. United States (Merits) [1986] ICJ Rep. 14.
See Bowett 1958; and Ragazzi 1997.
The exception is a brief foray into ASEAN’s security relationships in Kahler 2000a. The
Nicaragua Case (1986) is discussed in Keohane, Moravcsik, and Slaughter 2000, though
for purposes unrelated to an analysis of the customary law on the use of force.

192

International Law and International Relations

of customary law obligations has altered the content of interstate diplomatic rhetoric and affected bilateral political relationships. Canada and
Norway now engage in a trilateral ‘‘human rights dialogue’’ with China,
for example, an engagement that could not take place in the absence of
customary norms, for China has yet to ratify key human rights treaties.15
Again, it is not surprising that the one article on human rights concludes that the legalization framework does not explain behavior particularly well.

Defining Characteristics of Law
A second, related issue concerns the selection of obligation, precision,
and delegation as the defining characteristics of legalization. While the
volume’s framers offer careful discussion of these terms, their meanings,
and characteristics, they say little about why, among the universe of legal
features, these three are more important than others. These three features
certainly do not define law or distinguish it from other types of normativity, nor are they the source of law’s power (or, if they are, that case is not
made in the volume).
Precision and delegation are particularly problematic. In a number of
well-established areas of international law with strong records of influence and compliance, norms are relatively imprecise. Examples include
the delimitation of maritime boundaries (often accomplished on the basis
of ‘‘equity’’), the bases of state criminal jurisdiction (where overlapping
rules are the norm), and state responsibility (including a very broad duty
not to knowingly allow one’s territory to be used in a manner harmful to
another state). Similarly, there are wide swaths of functioning international law that do not depend in any way on extensive ‘‘delegation’’ of
decision-making authority. Outside of the European context, the entire
law of human rights operates and affects world politics without any
mechanisms of compulsory adjudication. *** A comparable pattern of
influence in the absence of delegation is found in international environmental law. Many international environmental commitments continue to
function on the basis of information-sharing and voluntary compliance.
Where modern treaties create mechanisms to promote implementation,
they are often premised on the need for positive reinforcement of

15

For example, although China recently ratified the International Covenant on Economic,
Social, and Cultural Rights, it has yet to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.

Alternatives to Legalization

193

obligations rather than on adjudication and sanctions for noncompliance. There is no extensive delegation of decision-making authority.
Why delegation and precision should be defining features of legalization
and what they add to the analytic power of this concept is simply not
clear.
Further, the relationship among these three characteristics is unexplored, a significant lacuna since these features could contribute to
contradictory developments in many circumstances. Increased precision
could lead to less obligation, when prospective members of legal regimes
are driven away by fears of detailed rules that are inflexible (a point
actually supported by the description of the WTO offered by Judith
Goldstein and Lisa Martin).16 Delegation of decision making can also
lead to less precision in rules rather than to greater clarity, as presumed
by the proponents of legalization. If one considers the decisions of the
International Court of Justice in boundary delimitation cases, for example, the results are clearly legal, influential, and effective in promoting
compliance, but they are highly imprecise.17 What we gain by combining,
rather than disaggregating, concepts with such complex and tense interrelationships is not well explained.
Most problematic, however, is the volume’s conceptualization of
obligation, arguably the central preoccupation both of lawyers and of
political scientists interested in how norms affect state behavior. Obligation is central to the volume’s framework of legalization, yet the authors
articulate no theory of obligation and seem remarkably uncurious about
how a sense of obligation might be generated. In the volume’s lead article,
legal obligation is defined in an entirely circular fashion, with reference to
its products: ‘‘Legal obligations bring into play the established norms,
procedures, and forms of discourse of the international legal system.’’18
We know obligation by what it achieves, but this approach does not
explain how obligation creates these products. To the extent that the
bases of obligation are treated at all in the framing article, the conceptualization is very thin, formal, and contractual. Obligation is created
when parties enter into treaties or other express agreements. The mechanism for generating obligation is thus choice – presumably choice by
16
17

18

Goldstein and Martin 2000.
In the North Sea Continental Shelf Cases [1969] ICJ Rep. 3, the court articulated a ‘‘rule’’
of law that the continental shelf should be divided on the basis of ‘‘equitable delimitation taking into consideration all of the circumstances.’’ This rule has shaped all subsequent continental shelf negotiations as well as judicial and arbitral decisions.
Abbott et al. 2000, 409.

194

International Law and International Relations

utility-maximizing actors.19 Yet both legal scholars and international
relations (IR) scholars understand very well that contractual obligations
alone are often insufficient to determine behavior.
More careful theorizing of these defining characteristics might have
led the framers to explore some alternative features of law and develop
more robust concepts. For example, one concept that is notably absent
from the various analyses of obligation is legitimacy, yet legal scholars have
long focused on legitimacy as an essential source of obligation and
‘‘compliance pull’’ in law.20 Legitimacy in law has been argued to have
a number of interrelated sources. Legitimacy is generated in part through
attention to internal legal values that we seem to take for granted in
the liberal democratic West but that students of repression will recognize as essential. Law is legitimate only to the extent that it produces rules
that are generally applicable, exhibit clarity or determinacy, are coherent
with other rules, are publicized (so that people know what they are), seek
to avoid retroactivity, are relatively constant over time, are possible to
perform, and are congruent with official action.21 Law that adheres to
these values is more likely to generate a sense of obligation, and corresponding behavior change, than law that ignores these values.
Legal legitimacy also depends on agents in the system understanding
why rules are necessary.22 Participating in constructing law enhances
agents’ understanding of its necessity. Finally, adherence to specific legal
rationality that all participants understand and accept helps to
19

20

21

22

In Abbott and Snidal’s discussion of ‘‘soft law,’’ that quintessentially fluid concept is
treated as a preexisting form of institution to be chosen by states for strategic reasons.
Abbott and Snidal 2000. This approach misses much of what we know from many legal
analyses about how soft law works; see Chinkin 1989; Hillgenberg 1999; and Finnemore
2000. First, soft law is not simply ‘‘out there’’ waiting to be chosen. Part of what is ‘‘soft’’
about this form of law is precisely that it is in flux, in the process of becoming. How states
treat it is not exogenous to soft law; it determines and shapes soft law; it is constitutive
of it. Equally important, the notion that states ‘‘choose’’ soft law formulations is misleading. Soft law, like customary law, is not always ‘‘chosen’’ in a meaningful strategic sense.
For example, the evolution of the ‘‘precautionary principle’’ or ‘‘intergenerational equity’’
in international environmental law is a study in normative entrepreneurship and subtle instantiation as much as in strategic choice. See Brunne´e 1993; and Brunne´e and
Toope 1997.
See Lauterpacht 1947; Lasswell and McDougal 1971 (where legitimacy is not discussed
directly but is implicit in the posited relationship between ‘‘authority’’ and ‘‘control’’);
Franck 1990; and Byers 1999.
See Fuller 1969; Franck 1990; and Postema 1994. These legitimating characteristics are
much broader than the volume authors’ concept of ‘‘precision,’’ as indicated by Fuller’s
term for these values – ‘‘internal morality of law.’’ Fuller 1969.
See Fuller 1969; and Postema 1994.

Alternatives to Legalization

195

legitimate the collective construction of the law. Legal claims are
legitimate and persuasive only if they are rooted in reasoned argument
that creates analogies to past practice, demonstrate congruence with the
overall systemic logic of existing law, and attend to contemporary social
aspirations and the larger moral fabric of society.23 Law that exhibits
this kind of rationality – that is viewed as necessary, involves in its construction those it binds, and adheres to internal legal values – is more
likely to be viewed as legitimate than law that does not have these
features.
Legitimate law generates obligation, not just in a formal sense but
also in a felt sense. Legitimacy thus connects obligation to behavior in
important ways.24 This is a major strain of argument in international law
scholarship, one that IR scholars do read, yet the authors of the IO volume do not address legitimacy as part of the legalization phenomenon.
They never investigate legitimacy’s relationship to obligation, precision,
and delegation, nor do they explore alternative hypotheses concerning
legitimacy.25 We suspect that legitimacy is a prior variable, generating
a felt sense of obligation and empowering those who delegate to do so.
Variations in legitimacy almost certainly relate to variations in legalization. The spread of formal legal institutions investigated in the volume
is likely to depend on the legitimacy of these formal legal processes generally and on the legitimacy of the particular configurations of these
processes (the kind of delegation, the nature and content of the obligation) that these institutions embody.
Law as Process
A third fundamental issue to consider is the nature of legalization itself.
The authors of this volume treat law as an artifact – something created
by state choice – and equate legalization with three features of the form
of this artifact (obligation, delegation, precision). Politics thus becomes
‘‘legalized,’’ in their view, as it displays these three features. When one
thinks about what legitimates law, however, another possibility emerges.
Law, and by implication legalization, may be much more about process

23
24
25

See Fuller 1969; Franck 1990; and Brunne´e and Toope 2000.
Franck 1990.
Abbott and Snidal recognize that legitimacy exists, but they do not theorize or investigate
its independent causal effects on strategic choice. Abbott and Snidal 2000, 428–29. Lutz
and Sikkink do explore legitimacy issues and find, as we suggest, that these are causally
prior to legalization. Lutz and Sikkink 2000, 654–59.

196

International Law and International Relations

than about form or product. Much of what legitimates law and distinguishes it from other forms of normativity are the processes by which
it is created and applied – adherence to legal process values, the ability of actors to participate and feel their influence, and the use of legal
forms of reasoning. A view of legalization that focused on legal relationships and processes rather than forms would be more dynamic and better
suited to explaining change – which many of us, the volume’s authors
included, are interested in. Unlike Thomas M. Franck, we would not
argue that process is the only thing that legitimates law.26 Values suffuse
legal argument and they underlie legal processes generally, so it is not
sufficient to seek the power of law solely in the details of its processes of
elaboration and application.27 But it is equally suspect to craft a framework for the empirical study of legalization that ignores process in favor
of an essentially structural, and product-focused, analysis.
As framed in the volume, the world’s ‘‘move to law’’ is a move to a
very particular kind of law, and not one that resonates with international lawyers who are unaccustomed to the narrow view of obligation
espoused by the authors and who would doubt that precision or delegation
are the hallmarks of growing normativity in international relations. A
broader understanding of law would open up research connections among
scholars who would not find the authors’ formulation of legalization
particularly engaging. Most obviously, a more culturally and sociologically attuned formulation of the role of law speaks to constructivist
concerns and builds bridges between that group of IR scholars and
like-minded thinkers in law. Situating law in its broader social context
allows room for cultural explanations of behavior and identity formation
in ways that these scholars will find helpful. It also promises to reveal
connections between IR theory and approaches to comparative law that
address issues of identity and normative change within legal traditions.28
Focusing on law as a set of relationships, processes, and institutions
embedded in social context has the further advantage of reformulating
the lively legal debate over how ‘‘soft’’ law ‘‘hardens’’ and connecting it
with the rich and growing body of work on transnational norm dynamics
that has occupied constructivists in recent years. ***

26
27
28

Franck 1990.
See Hurrell 2000; and Toope 2000.
See Postema 1991; Kennedy 1997; and Glenn 2000.

Alternatives to Legalization

197

what difference does law make?
A fuller understanding of law is not simply a pleasing accessory to the
framework proposed in this volume, however. It is a necessity. The purpose of the legalization concept is presumably to facilitate empirical research. If a narrowly drawn and simplified concept generates new insights
for researchers and helps them explain empirical puzzles, it may still be
valuable. To assess whether legalization does this, we examine the three
articles in the volume that apply the concept of legalization to different
issue-areas. Our examination suggests that the concept provides little
help to these researchers, not only because it contains such a narrow notion of law but also because it is inadequately theorized.
Beth Simmons, applying the concept of legalization to monetary affairs, asks why states voluntarily declare themselves bound by Article
VIII rules concerning current account restrictions and unified exchange
rates. She frames this as a credible commitments problem. The policy
dilemma for states is to make their commitments to Article VIII rules
credible to markets, thus producing desired investment flows. Law’s role
is to provide a ‘‘hook’’ or signal that makes commitments credible.29
The legalization concept does little work here. Simmons certainly
does not need it to carry out her analysis. The only aspect of the concept Simmons treats is obligation, recasting it as ‘‘credible commitment’’;
precision and delegation are apparently not relevant. Conceptual equipment for credible commitment and signaling analyses have been around
for a long time. Simmons could have completed essentially the same analysis without ‘‘legalization.’’ ***
Adopting a richer view of law, as we suggest, might open this analysis
to some important questions and make law more than peripheral in our
understanding of these events. A focus on law’s role, for example, might
prompt us to ask whether or why legal commitments are credible signals
to markets for all states. After all, some of the developing countries most
successful at attracting investment, such as China and Indonesia, have
extremely weak conceptions and applications of the rule of law. If accepting legal obligations is such an important signal to investors, as assumed
here, why do investors pour so much money into countries where law is so
weak?30 If Simmons believes that domestic and international rule of law
are unconnected, so that investors assume that even countries without
29
30

Simmons 2000, 601.
Wang’s analysis of exactly this question in the case of China points squarely to the need
for a broader view of how law works. Wang 2000.

198

International Law and International Relations

effective rule of law domestically will be bound unproblematically in the
international realm, this would certainly require some elaboration, since
it cuts against prominent past work by other authors in the volume.31
More generally, equating law with obligation and obligation with
credible commitments ignores much of what law does in monetary affairs
that might be relevant to Simmons’ analysis. The notion that law is merely
promise-keeping ignores both the authoritative and the transformative
character of law. States are not making the Article VIII decisions in a legal
vacuum. The Articles of Agreement (of which Article VIII is a part) created
an entire structure of law on monetary affairs, including a Weberian
rational-legal bureaucracy (the International Monetary Fund) to make
policy on monetary matters. Law thus created a new source of authority
in monetary matters, the IMF, which generated new rules for states but
also new knowledge about technical matters in economic policy that
changed expectations for behavior. Throughout the period examined by
Simmons, states are making their decisions about Article VIII commitments in a dynamic environment of law, rules, and economic knowledge
about monetary policy, and much of this changing environment is actively
promoted by the IMF. ***
Goldstein and Martin’s analysis of trade politics addresses the volume’s legalization concept much more directly. They examine the effects
of increasing obligation, precision, and delegation in formal trade agreements on international cooperation and compliance. They find that ‘‘more
is not necessarily better’’ because more precision and ‘‘bindingness’’ in
rules can mobilize protectionist groups who can now better calculate the
costs of freer trade.
What work does the legalization concept do here? As in Simmons’
article, Goldstein and Martin create a link between legalization and another well-known concept in political analysis, in this case, information.
‘‘Increased transparency’’ (better information) is added to the definition
of legalization without comment in this article.32 Information then becomes the centerpiece of the analysis. ‘‘Legalization entails a process of
increasing rule precision, [ergo] a more legalized trade regime will provide more and better information about the distributional implications
of commercial agreements.’’33 Once we understand what legalization

31
32
33

For example, Slaughter 1995.
Goldstein and Martin 2000, 604.
Ibid., 604.

Alternatives to Legalization

199

does to information, information does most of the heavy analytic lifting
in this article, not law.
*** Goldstein and Martin make a strong case that an inverse relationship exists between precision and any sense of felt obligation, since more
precision tends to promote greater use of escape clauses and mobilizes
interest groups for noncompliance. ***
Unfortunately, however, Goldstein and Martin’s findings seem not to
have prompted much rethinking of the content of legalization by the
volume’s framers or by Miles Kahler in the conclusion.34 Such an overall
examination might have revealed additional problematic relationships
among their three elements of legalization, even in the Goldstein and
Martin article. For example, it is not clear that increased precision in law
always increases certainty about distributional effects, as Goldstein and
Martin assume. If increased precision involves delegation, uncertainty
may remain high or even increase because delegation, by its nature,
creates uncertainty in principal-agent relationships. Thus, members of the
WTO may have more precise rules about resolving disputes than they
did under the GATT, but the workings of the dispute settlement body may
be sufficiently opaque or unpredictable that distributional consequences
remain uncertain in many areas. Conversely, increased delegation does
not guarantee more precise rules for the same principal-agent reasons, so
there is no reason to think those co-vary. The overall effect of Goldstein
and Martin’s interesting finding about the effects of information is thus
to suggest a wide array of possible relationships among legalization’s
core features. This, in turn, suggests that the legalization concept is itself
less analytically useful than its component parts, which, as we noted earlier, are not necessarily or uniquely legal.
More attention to law might lead these authors to ask some substantive questions that would bear on their findings. These authors are commendably enthusiastic about including domestic politics in their analysis
yet remarkably inattentive to variations in those politics created by widely
varying structures of domestic law. Law governing ratification of trade
agreements, central to this analysis, differs hugely across even the
democratic, industrialized countries on which these authors focus. These
differences profoundly change the ‘‘logic of [domestic interest group]
mobilization’’ in different countries, around which the analysis revolves.
For example, the authors assert that it is the need for treaty ratification,
with attendant public processes of debate, that gives rise to the
34

Kahler 2000b.

200

International Law and International Relations

possibility of effective protectionist backlash. Yet in Canada, the United
States’ largest trading partner, the treaty-making power is held by the
functional equivalent of the executive branch (in practice the prime
minister and cabinet), and there is no constitutional requirement for
ratification by Parliament. The entire NAFTA treaty could have been
concluded by the executive branch, benefiting from the legitimacy granted
by an overwhelming parliamentary majority, without any opportunity for
formal political debate. ***
These differences in legal structure are more than simply differences
in the constraints or political opportunity structure surrounding strategic
actors. Domestic structures of law are, themselves, mobilizing factors
for a wide variety of groups involved in trade politics. Domestic law is
what constitutes, empowers, and mobilizes a host of interest groups,
from trade unions, to professional organizations, to business groups,
to environmentalists and human rights activists. Unions have different
forms and powers in different national legal contexts, as do business
groups and nongovernmental organizations. Law’s role in mobilizing different groups is much more profound than mere provision of information.
* * *
Goldstein and Martin are certainly correct that domestic politics are
important in trade politics, but significant variation in domestic legal
systems should provoke some caution in claiming generalized effects of
domestic ratification on interest group politics. If generalizing their analysis to Canada is problematic, we suspect that generalizing to Europe and
Asia, and certainly the developing world, would be even more so. ***
Ellen Lutz and Kathryn Sikkink apply the legalization concept to human rights to test their hypothesis that increased legalization increases
compliance with human rights law.35 They examine three areas of human rights law – torture, disappearance, and democratic governance –
and find the least compliance in the most ‘‘legalized’’ area, torture, and
the most compliance in the least ‘‘legalized’’ area, democratic governance.
They find stronger explanatory power for compliance in broader social
variables and in the ‘‘norm cascade’’ that swept through Latin America in
the 1970s and 1980s.
Oddly, the legalization concept seems to be most useful to these researchers who find its effects so limited. Unlike Simmons, or Goldstein
and Martin, Lutz and Sikkink take us through an examination of the
35

Lutz and Sikkink 2000.

Alternatives to Legalization

201

concept, as defined in the framing chapter, and discuss its application to
their issue-area. Lutz and Sikkink do not turn legalization into some other
analytic concept (like information or credible commitment) to carry out
the analysis. In particular, they engage explicitly with the concept of obligation, suggesting briefly that human rights norms are often rooted in
customary law. They also stress that any existing ‘‘right’’ to democratization can only be a social norm or a customary norm. Their findings support
the understanding of obligation that we traced out earlier, an approach
rooted in social processes of interaction. To be effective, obligation needs
to be felt, and not simply imposed through a hierarchy of sources of law.
Precision and delegation play absolutely no role in the promotion of compliance, at least with these human rights norms. Once Lutz and Sikkink
find the legalization hypothesis wanting, they move into familiar conceptual turf (for Sikkink), employing the ‘‘norm cascade’’ concept elaborated elsewhere to explain the pattern of compliance they see.36
That Lutz and Sikkink focus so strongly on legalization’s contribution to compliance brings us back to an important problem. As noted
earlier, the framing article is not clear about analytic objectives. If the volume’s purpose is primarily to describe legalization, then Lutz and Sikkink’s
article is beside the point. After all, the framing article does not claim that
legalization will lead to greater compliance with law. Consequently, the
fact that a more highly legalized area engenders less compliance than
a less legalized area is neither here nor there for the framers of the volume.
Yet the idea that this finding is somehow beside the point and gives no
pause to the framers, as revealed by Kahler’s dismissive treatment of Lutz
and Sikkink’s article in the conclusion, is surprising, since elsewhere the
volume’s authors claim to investigate the consequences of legalization
that, presumably, would involve compliance.37 More generally, if the
purpose of the legalization concept is to generate hypotheses that guide
research, one would expect disconfirming evidence of the type Lutz and
Sikkink present to result in a rethinking of the basic concept. ***

conclusion
No analysis can do everything, but analysts must justify their choice
of focus in the light of other obvious possibilities. The framers of the
legalization concept are not explicit, however, about their limited view of
36
37

Finnemore and Sikkink 1998.
Goldstein et al. 2000, 386.

202

International Law and International Relations

law or about alternative views of law (or IR theory) that might yield
different understandings of their cases. Further, they have not adequately
theorized their definition of legalization so as to provide clear help to
the empirical researchers seeking to apply the concept. We have called
attention to some alternative views of law and suggested ways they can
help us to address gaps in the authors’ own framework that might lead
researchers to examine important questions neglected in this volume.
Our hope is the same as the authors’ – that international law and IR
scholars will begin to read each other’s work more carefully and use
each other’s insights in analysis. Our suspicion, however, is that this process will not yield a long trail of scholarship on the concept of legalization as defined in the volume discussed here. Rather, as IR scholars read
more broadly in international law, they will find rich connections between
the two fields and will be able to create joint research agendas that are
diverse and fruitful.

part iv
INTERNATIONAL LAW AND INTERNATIONAL
NORMS

10
Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory:
International Jurisprudence and the Third World
Robert H. Jackson

practice and theory
Since the end of World War II we have been witnessing what in retrospect
looks more and more like a revolutionary period of international history
when sovereign statehood – the constitutive principle of international
society – is subjected to major change. It is perhaps most evident in the
remarkable role of the United Nations in fostering new sovereignties
around the world. In this paper I argue that African states are juridical
artifacts of a highly accommodating regime of international law and
politics which is an expression of a twentieth-century anticolonial ideology
of self-determination. This civil regime has important implications for
international theory and particularly the renewed interest in sovereignty.1
The discourse characteristic of sovereignty is jurisprudential rather than
sociological: the language of rules rather than roles, prescribed norms
instead of observed regularities. The study of sovereignty therefore

1

See, for example, Stephen D. Krasner, ed., International Regimes (Ithaca and London:
Cornell University Press, 1983), particularly the editor’s introductory and concluding
chapters, and John Gerard Ruggie, ‘‘Continuity and Transformation in the World Polity,’’
in Robert O. Keohane, ed., Neorealism and Its Critics (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1986), pp. 130–57. A major new study which has been very influential in my own
thinking is Alan James, Sovereign Statehood: The Basis of International Society (London:
Allen & Unwin, 1986).

An earlier version of this paper was presented at a panel convened by James Mayall on ‘‘The
Crisis of the State and International Relations Theory’’ at the British International Studies
Association Annual Conference, University of Reading, 15–17 December 1986. am grateful
to Mark Zacher, Stephen Krasner, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions
and the Donner Canadian Foundation for financial support.

205

206

International Law and International Relations

involves us in legal theory, international law, and international institutions
in the broadest meaning of these terms: what elsewhere I call the ‘‘civil
science’’ approach to the study of politics.2 By ‘‘neoclassical international
theory’’ I refer to what Hedley Bull describes as ‘‘theorizing that derives
from philosophy, history, and law’’ or what Martin Wight calls ‘‘a tradition of speculation about relations between states’’: the companion of
‘‘political theory.’’3
The constitutional tradition generally tends to assume, with Grotius,
Burke, and Oakeshott as against Machiavelli, Kant, and Marx, that theory
by and large is the child and not the parent of practice in political life. In
Hegel’s famous phrase: ‘‘The owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with
the falling of the dusk.’’4 The same point is made by the English
philosopher Gilbert Ryle: ‘‘Intelligent practice is not a stepchild of theory.
On the contrary, theorizing is one practice amongst others and is itself
intelligently or stupidly conducted.’’5 He goes on to argue that ‘‘knowing that’’ (history) and ‘‘knowing why’’ (philosophy) are categorically
different from ‘‘knowing how’’ (practice) in much the same way as being
a connoisseur of baseball does not depend at all on the ability to pitch
strikes or hit home runs. The reverse can be true also. Players are often
inarticulate when it comes to explaining their play to observers.
‘‘Knowing how to operate is not knowing how to tell how to operate.’’6
It is the unusual diplomat, such as Machiavelli or Kissinger, who is also an
international theorist of note. According to this epistemology, the project
of the practitioner is to shape the world, whereas that of the scholar is to
understand it and explain it in coherent terms.
The revolutionaries and nationalists, statesmen and diplomatists who
gave effect to the twentieth-century revolt against the West succeeded
completely in transferring sovereign statehood to Africa and other parts

2

3

4

5
6

See Robert H. Jackson, ‘‘Civil Science: A Rule-Based Paradigm for Comparative
Government’’ (Delivered at the Annual Conference of the American Political Science
Association, Chicago, 3–6 September 1987).
Hedley Bull, ‘‘International Theory: The Case for a Classical Approach,’’ in K. Knorr
and J. N. Rosenau, eds., Contending Approaches to International Politics (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1969), p. 20 and Martin Wight, ‘‘Why Is There No
International Theory?’’ in H. Butterfield and M. Wight, eds., Diplomatic Investigations
(London: Allen & Unwin, 1966), p. 17.
T. M. Knox, ed., Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (London: Oxford University Press, 1979),
p. 13.
G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1968), chap. 2.
G. Ryle, ‘‘Ordinary Language,’’ in V. C. Chappell, ed., Ordinary Language (Englewood
Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964), p. 32.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

207

of the non-Western world after a century, more or less, of European
colonialism. In the course of doing it they fashioned if not a new, then
at least a substantially revised, set of international arrangements which
differ dramatically from those imperial ones that previously obstructed
the globalization of equal sovereignty. ***

civil regimes
International regimes may be defined as ‘‘implicit or explicit principles,
norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which actors’ expectations converge in a given area of international relations.’’7 Although much of the emphasis in regime analysis has been in areas of
political economy, this definition is highly consistent with civil domains
in international relations directly related to sovereign statehood, such as
recognition, jurisdiction, intervention, human rights, and so forth. It is
similar to Hedley Bull’s constitutional conception of rules in a society of
states: ‘‘general imperative principles which require or authorise’’ behavior and which ‘‘may have the status of law, of morality, of custom or
etiquette, or simply of operating procedures or ‘rules of the game.’’’8 ***
* * *
Sovereignty, the basic constituent principle of the international civil
regime, is not only a normative but essentially a legal relationship. Alan
James defines sovereign statehood as ‘‘constitutional independence’’ of other
states. ‘‘All that constitutional independence means is that a state’s constitution is not part of a larger constitutional arrangement.’’9 Sovereignty,
like any other human convention, is something that can be acquired and
lost, claimed or denied, respected or violated, celebrated or condemned,
changed or abandoned, and so forth. It is a historical phenomenon.
Because sovereignty is essentially a legal order and basically entails
rules, it can very appropriately be understood in terms of a game: an
activity constituted and regulated by rules. It is useful to distinguish
two logically different but frequently confused kinds of rules: constitutive (civil) and instrumental (organizational). Constitutive rules define
7

8
9

Krasner, International Regimes, p. 2. Among contemporary British international theorists
the term ‘‘international society’’ is used to denote the same phenomenon. See, for example, Hedley Bull, The Anarchical Society (London: Macmillan, 1967), chaps. 1 and 3.
The term ‘‘international regimes’’ is preferable because it denotes principles and rules and
not merely regularities or norms: in other words, it is a better jurisprudential term.
Bull, ‘‘International Theory,’’ p. 54.
James, Sovereign Statehood, p. 25.

208

International Law and International Relations

the game, whereas instrumental rules are maxims derived from experience which contribute to winning play. The constitutive rules of the
sovereignty game include legal equality of states, mutual recognition, nonintervention, making and honoring treaties, diplomacy conducted in accordance with accepted practices, and other civil international relations.
On the other hand, foreign policy (whether public or secret) and similar
stratagems, as well as the state organizations which correspond to them,
are among the major instruments employed by statesmen in pursuing
their interests. Classical reason of state and therefore realism as an international theory belong logically to the instrumental part of the sovereignty
game.10 Classical rationalism belongs to the constitutive part, with which
this article is mainly concerned.
Sovereignty began in Europe as an independence de facto between
states but became an independence de jure – which is ‘‘sovereignty’’ properly socalled – as natural barriers were overcome by technology, international relations increased, and statesmen subjected their external
actions to customary practices which in the course of time acquired the
status of law.11 As the system expanded globally into new continents
and oceans, states encountered along the way eventually had to be
classified.12 Ashanti, a traditional West African kingdom, was independent de facto prior to its conquest by Britain in the late 19th century.
The Gold Coast, a British colony in which the kingdom was subordinated, was not sovereign because it was not legally independent of
Great Britain. To the contrary, it was constitutionally part of the British
Empire.13 Ghana, the sovereign successor to the Gold Coast since 1957
in which Ashanti continues to be subordinated, is legally independent
not only of Britain but all other sovereign states. Such changes of status
are typical of the movement of international civil regimes over time.
Sovereignty is an extremely important political value in itself, as the
20th-century revolt against the West by Third World anticolonialists
10

11

12

13

Classical realism goes one step farther by suggesting that international relations are
totally instrumental and not at all an institutionalized game. Hans Morgenthau discloses
this conception in his defining statement: ‘‘International politics, like all politics, is
a struggle for power.’’ Politics among Nations (New York: Knopf, 1966), p. 25.
See C. H. McIlwain, The Growth of Political Thought in the West (New York:
Macmillan, 1932), p. 268.
See the remarkable collection of essays analyzing this process in Hedley Bull and Adam
Watson, ed., The Expansion of International Society (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984),
especially Parts I and II.
See Martin Wight, British Colonial Constitutions 1947 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952),
pp. 80–81.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

209

strikingly indicates. It is significant for this reason alone. In addition,
however, it is consequential for other political goods, domestic and international, such as order, justice, economic welfare, and so forth.14 Sovereignty, like all constitutive rules, has important consequences, intended
and unintended. The rules are intrinsically interesting for international
lawyers who, as practitioners, treat the law of sovereignty as a text to
master. For international theorists, however, sovereignty is a language
to understand.15 Where the rules lead are usually more important than
the rules themselves. The unintended consequences are often most interesting theoretically because they are also unexpected and therefore disclose something similar to the refutation of a hypothesis in science.16
An example relevant to this discussion is the surprising civil and socioeconomic adversities which befell many African jurisdictions following
their acquisition of sovereignty.
As with other constitutive rules, there are important conditions which
make sovereignty attainable or unattainable in any particular case. In
1885, for example, the constitutional independence of African states was
not only unattainable but also inconceivable. *** A hundred years later
the rules and the conditions had changed fundamentally. Among the most
important conditions affecting changes in the sovereignty game are the
differential power and wealth of states, of course, but also prevailing
international moralities and ideologies. In some cases the latter may be the
most significant, as I suggest below in discussing the spread of sovereignty
to tropical Africa.
It should by now be evident that colonialism, in addition to being
a socioeconomic phenomenon, is in important and indeed fundamental
respects an international civil regime grounded in the law of sovereignty.
Colonization and decolonization therefore denote changes in the principles and rules by which people are governed: their movement from one
regime to another. More significant than this, however, is a fundamental
change of regime which has happened in connection with colonialism:
international regime change. *** Decolonization is the sort of basic
historical change which we have perhaps come to take for granted but
14

15

16

See J. Roland Pennock, ‘‘Political Development, Political Systems, and Political Goods,’’
World Politics 18 (1966), pp. 415–34.
The distinction between politics as a literature and as a language is explored by Michael
Oakeshott in ‘‘The Study of ‘Politics’ in a University,’’ Rationalism in Politics and Other
Essays (London: Methuen, 1962), p. 313.
According to Popper this is how science advances. See his Conjectures and Refutations
(New York: Harper & Row Torchbooks, 1968).

210

International Law and International Relations

which signals a fundamental alteration in the constitutive principles of
sovereignty, particularly as regards the Third World periphery.

decolonization
President John F. Kennedy once characterized decolonization as ‘‘a
worldwide declaration of independence.’’17 This is certainly true of subSaharan Africa, where in 1955 there were only three independent countries: Ethiopia, Liberia, and South Africa. By the end of 1965, there were
thirty-one, and decolonization was looming even in the so-called white
redoubt of southern Africa. By 1980, the entire continent was sovereign
apart from Namibia.
African decolonization, like the partition of the continent three-quarters
of a century earlier, is the instance of a straight line in international history:
a political artifact largely and in some cases almost entirely divorced from
substantive conditions; a supreme example of ‘‘rationalism’’ in Michael
Oakeshott’s meaning of politics ‘‘as the crow flies.’’18 It is not only possible
but has become conventional to regard a single year – 1960, the year of
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s famous ‘‘wind of change’’ speech and
of the decolonization of the entire French African empire – as a historical
dividing line separating the era of European colonialism from that of
African independence. That year is matched only by 1884–85, when the
continent was subjected to international partition according to rules
established by a conference of mainly European states meeting in Berlin.
The political map of Africa is devoid by and large of indigenous
determinations in its origins. All but a very few traditional political
systems were subordinated or submerged by the colonialists. Decolonization rarely resulted in their elevation. ‘‘Most of the boundary lines in
Africa are diplomatic in origin and, in very many instances, they are that
abomination of the scientific geographers, the straight line.’’19 In colonial
Africa, according to an important study, ‘‘the ultimate decisions in the
allocation of territories and the delimitation of borders were always made
by Europeans.’’20 Despite the fact that it was European in origin, the
17

18
19

20

Quoted by E. Plischke, Microstates in World Affairs (Washington, DC.: American
Enterprise Institute, 1977), p. i.
Oakeshott, Rationalism in Politics, p. 69.
G. L. Beer, African Questions at the Paris Peace Conference (New York: Scribners,
1923), p. 65.
S. Touval, The Boundary Politics of Independent Africa (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1972), p. 4.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

211

political map of Africa was accepted in its entirety by post-colonial
African governments. A 1964 resolution of the Organization of African
states considered ‘‘that the borders of African States, on the day of their
independence, constitute a tangible reality’’ and declared ‘‘that all Member States pledge themselves to respect the borders existing on their achievement of national independence.’’21 Political Africa is an intrinsically
imperial cum international construct.
Colonial governments were never particularly large or imposing, and
it is something of a misnomer to speak of them as colonial ‘‘states.’’ They
were comparable not to states but, rather, to small provincial, county, or
municipal governments in European countries. We come close to committing the historical fallacy of retrospective determinism if we conceive of
them as emergent or prospective national states. A. H. M. Kirk-Greene
refers to the British colonial service in Africa as ‘‘the thin white line.’’22
When we speak of a colonial government in Africa we are usually
referring only to several hundred and occasionally – in the larger
dependencies such as Nigeria and the Belgian Congo – several thousand
European officials. Their numbers could be small because colonies were
not sovereign: rather, they were parts – often small parts – of a far larger
transoceanic imperial state which backed up the colony. Their presence
was absolutely crucial, however, and enabled the modest governing
apparatus to be a going concern. Unlike the Indian civil service, these
administrations were never substantially indigenized at decision-making
levels before independence. For all intents and purposes they were the
colonial state.
In substance, decolonization typically involved the resignation or
retirement of European administrators, which therefore meant the elimination of the crucial operative component of empirical statehood. It
also involved the loss of the imperial backstop, of course. The new
rulers usually could not replace the operative component because there
was no group of Africans with comparable experience in running a modern government. After the Europeans left, the new states consequently
acquired the unintentional characteristics of ‘‘quasi-states’’ which are summarized below. The Congo, for example, collapsed with the abrupt departure of the Belgians in 1960 and could only be restored to a marginal

21

22

As quoted in A. McEwen, International Boundaries of East Africa (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1971), p. 22.
A. Kirk-Greene, ‘‘The Thin White Line: The Size of the British Colonial Service in
Africa,’’ African Affairs 79 (1980), pp. 25–44.

212

International Law and International Relations

semblance of organized statehood by a large-scale UN rescue operation. Most other ex-colonies deteriorated more gradually into pseudostatehood. They are all preserved more or less in this condition by new
accommodating norms of international society.
Independence, therefore, was not a result of the development of individual colonies to the point of meeting classical empirical qualifications
for statehood. On the contrary, it stemmed from a rather sudden and
widespread change of mind and mood about the international legitimacy
of colonialism which aimed at and resulted in its abolition as an international institution. During and after World War II, colonialism became
controversial and finally unacceptable in principle. Self-determination
for ex-colonies was transformed into a global human right during the same
period. Whatever else it may also have been, decolonization was an international regime change of the first importance: a ‘‘revolutionary’’ change,
as Puchala and Hopkins put it.
Independence could occur widely and rapidly across Africa because it
basically required little more than agreement or acquiescence concerning a new international legal principle that acknowledged as incipiently
sovereign all colonies which desired independence. It was essentially
a legal transaction: African elites acquired title to self-government from
colonial rulers, with the transfer generally recognized – indeed promoted
and celebrated – by the international community and particularly the
UN General Assembly. ***

quasi-states
When we look at the contemporary African states, we immediately notice
the extent to which most of them depart from current conceptions and
expectations of statehood. It is not that they, along with all other states,
to some extent fail to live up to their ideals. Rather, it is that they do
not disclose the empirical constituents by which real states are ordinarily
recognized. African states frequently lack the characteristics of a common
or public realm: state offices possess uncertain authority, government
organizations are ineffective and plagued by corruption, and the political
community is highly segmented ethnically into several ‘‘publics’’ rather
than one. The effect is to confuse political obligation almost fatally:
Most educated Africans are citizens of two publics in the same society. On the
other hand, they belong to a civic public from which they gain materially but to
which they give only grudgingly. On the other hand, they belong to a primordial
public from which they derive little or no material benefits but to which they are

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

213

expected to give generously and do give materially. To make matters more
complicated, their relationship to the primordial public is moral, while that to the
civic public is amoral. . . . The unwritten law . . . is that it is legitimate to rob the
civic public in order to strengthen the primordial public.23

This statement discloses what undoubtedly is the fundamental predicament of statehood in Africa: its existence almost exclusively as an exploitable treasure trove devoid of moral value. Unlike solidly established
authoritarian states, moreover, the typical African state’s apparatus of
power is not effectively organized. Corruption and incompetence infiltrate virtually every agency of government, not merely hampering but in
most cases undermining state autonomy and capacity. Corruption is integral rather than incidental to African politics.24 Self-enrichment and personal or factional aggrandizement constitute politics. Many ‘‘public’’
organizations are thoroughly ‘‘privatized’’ in the unusual sense that they
are riddled with nepotism, patronage, bribery, extortion, and other personal or black market relationships. In what has become a modern
classic Stanislav Andreski coins the apt term ‘‘kleptocracy’’ to characterize
African systems of government.25
The state in Africa is consequently more a personal- or primordialfavoring political arrangement than a public-regarding realm. Government is less an agency to provide political goods such as law, order,
security, justice, or welfare and more a fountain of privilege, wealth, and
power for a small elite who control it. If there is a consensus among
political scientists it is probably that the state in Africa is neo-patrimonial
in character.26 Those who occupy state offices, civilian and military, high
and low, are inclined to treat them as possessions rather than positions:
to live off their rents – very luxuriously in some cases – and use them to
reward persons and cliques who help maintain their power. According to

23

24

25

26

P. Ekeh, ‘‘Colonialism and the Two Publics in Africa,’’ Comparative Studies in Society
and History 17 (1975), p. 108.
Robert Williams, Political Corruption in Africa (Aldershot, England: Gower Publishing,
1987), chap. 1.
Stanislav Andreski, The African Predicament: A Study in the Pathology of Modernization
(New York: Atherton Press, 1968), chap. 7.
See, among others, Thomas S. Callaghy, The State-Society Struggle: Zaire in Comparative Perspective (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984); Christopher Clapham,
Third World Politics (Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1985); Robert
H. Jackson and Carl G. Rosberg, Personal Rule in Black Africa (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1982); and Victor T. LeVine, ‘‘African Patrimonial Regimes in
Comparative Perspective,’’ The Journal of Modern African Studies 18 (1980), pp.
657–73.

214

International Law and International Relations

a candid analysis, ‘‘west African governments represent in themselves the
single greatest threat to their citizens, treat the rule of law with contempt,
and multiply hasty public shemes designed principally for their own
private and collective enrichment.’’ ‘‘Development’’ in such circumstances
is empty rhetoric: ‘‘a world of words and numbers detached from material
and social realities.’’27
Large segments of national populations – probably a big majority in
most cases – cannot or will not draw the necessary distinction between
office and incumbent, between the authority and responsibility of officials
and their personal influence and discretion, upon which the realization of
modern statehood depends. Many governments are incapable of enforcing
their writ throughout their territory. *** Most African countries, even the
smallest ones, are fairly loose patchworks of plural allegiances and
identities somewhat reminiscent of medieval Europe, with the crucial difference that they are defined and supported externally by the institutional
framework of sovereignty regardless of their domestic conditions. ***
Can we speak intelligibly of African ‘‘states’’ in such circumstances?
Arguably we cannot, because they obviously are not yet substantial
realities in the conduct of public officials and citizens. They are nominal
by and large: abstractions represented by written constitutions, laws,
regulations, and the like which yet have too little purchase on behavior to
realize the conditions of empirical statehood. The reality is the non-statal
and anti-public conduct briefly described. ***
Some international theorists therefore speak of these countries as
‘‘nascent,’’ ‘‘quasi,’’ or ‘‘pseudo’’ states to draw attention to the fact that
they are states mainly by international ‘‘courtesy.’’28 They enjoy equal
sovereignty, as Bull and Watson point out, but they lack established legal
and administrative institutions capable of constraining and outlasting
the individuals who occupy their offices; ‘‘still less do they reflect respect
for constitutions or acceptance of the rule of law.’’29
African states are indeed states by courtesy, but the real question is why
such courtesy has been so extensively and uniformly granted almost
entirely in disregard of empirical criteria for statehood. It is surely because
a new practice has entered into the determination and preservation of
statehood on the margins of international society. The new states ***

27

28
29

Keith Hart, The Political Economy of West African Agriculture (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982), pp. 104–5.
Bull and Watson, International Society, p. 430.
Ibid.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

215

possess ‘‘juridical statehood’’ derived from a right of self-determination –
negative sovereignty – without yet possessing much in the way of
empirical statehood, disclosed by a capacity for effective and civil
government – positive sovereignty.30 Juridical statehood can be understood as, among other things, the international institution by which
Africa and some other extremely underdeveloped parts of the world were
brought into the international community on a basis of equal sovereignty
rather than some kind of associate statehood. It was invented because it
was, arguably, the only way these places could acquire constitutional
independence in a short period of time in conformity with the new
international equality.

juridical statehood in international law
We can begin to clarify the juridical framework of African states by glancing at the relevant international law on the subject. Although ‘‘juridical
statehood’’ is not a legal term of art, there are of course established legal
practices concerning the criteria of statehood. ***
The usual point of departure for analysis of these criteria is Article 1
of the Montevideo Convention on Rights and Duties of States (1933),
which declares: ‘‘The State as a person of international law should possess
the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined
territory; (c) government; and (d) capacity to enter into relations with
other States.’’31 Ian Brownlie notes that the core legal idea of a ‘‘state’’ is
a stable political community in a territory with an established legal order.
‘‘The existence of effective government, with centralized administrative and legislative organs, is the best evidence of a stable political
community.’’32
These empirical criteria are the successors of classical positive international law which emphasized qualifications for admission to the community of states. The main difference from former (late 19th and early
20th century) doctrine is the absence of the standard of ‘‘civilization’’
criterion, which emerged in support of European expansion into the
non-Western world to deal not only with the philosophical problem of
knowing which governments to recognize as ‘‘authentic’’ sovereigns but
30

31

32

See Robert H. Jackson, ‘‘Negative Sovereignty in Sub-Saharan Africa,’’ Review of
International Studies 12 (October 1986), pp. 247–64.
Quoted by Ian Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law, third ed. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1979), p. 74.
Ibid., p. 75.

216

International Law and International Relations

also with the practical problem of protecting the persons, property, and
liberties of Europeans in non-Western countries.33 By the 1930s, however, that qualification was controversial and emphasis had shifted to
‘‘effective government.’’ It was the latter criterion which defenders of
colonialism ordinarily used to ward off demands by African nationalists
for immediate self-government.
This criterion is problematical, however. Part of the difficulty is
conceptual. *** Governments are ‘‘institutional’’ rather than ‘‘brute’’
facts in which or concepts of government are bound to enter.34 Legal
and political practice is what ultimately determines effective government,
and not the reverse. And these practices have changed fundamentally. The
problem is disclosed in legal practice.35 *** Writing of Zaire (the Congo)
in the early 1960s, following the abrupt departure of the Belgians, when
the government literally collapsed, James Crawford comments:
Anything less like effective government it would be hard to imagine. Yet despite
this there can be little doubt that the Congo was in 1960 a State in the full sense
of the term. It was widely recognized. Its application for United Nations membership was approved without dissent.36

Other considerations were evidently more important than this one. The
criterion is also problematical in reverse cases. For example, Rhodesia was
an effective government at least from 1965 to 1975 when, with the independence of neighboring Mozambique, the civil war began to undermine
it. Crawford remarks: ‘‘There can be no doubt that, if the traditional
tests for independence . . . applied, Rhodesia would . . . [have become]. . .
an independent state.’’37 However, these tests do not apply any longer
and have been replaced by something else. *** Crawford concludes:
‘‘The proposition that statehood must always be equated with effectiveness is not supported by modern practice.’’38
33

34

35

36
37

38

See G. W. Gong, The Standard of ‘‘Civilization’’ in International Society (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1984), chap. 2.
‘‘A State is not a fact in the sense that a chair is a fact; it is a fact in the sense in which
it may be said that a treaty is a fact: that is, a legal status attaching to a certain state of
affairs by virtue of certain rules.’’ J. Crawford, ‘‘The Criteria for Statehood in
International Law,’’ British Yearbook of International Law 1976–1977 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1978), p. 95.
See the discussion of ‘‘effective control’’ in Malcolm N. Shaw, Title to Territory in Africa:
International Legal Issues (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), pp. 16–24.
Crawford, ‘‘Criteria for Statehood in International Law,’’ pp. 116–17.
Ibid., p. 162. Also see the penetrating analysis of the Rhodesian case in James, Sovereign Statehood, pp. 153–60.
Crawford, ‘‘Criteria for Statehood in International Law,’’ p. 144.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

217

Insofar as the criterion has any content today, it is not that of actual
effectiveness but of title to exercise authority within a certain territory. In
theory this is a ‘‘category mistake,’’ but in international legal and political
practice, it is merely an expediency. All ex-colonial governments in Africa
today have the title, but far from all are actually effective throughout their
territorial jurisdictions. The effectiveness of some is extremely dubious.
An international society in which substantial political systems *** are
denied legal personality, while quasi-states *** enjoy it, is indicative of
new international practice. And according to this practice, once sovereignty is acquired by virtue of independence from colonial rule, then
extensive civil strife or breakdown of order or governmental immobility or
any other failures are not considered to detract from it. We see international law adapting to the new, inclusive, pluralistic, egalitarian, and
far-flung community of states, by a definite and indeed pronounced
loosening of empirical qualifications on sovereign statehood. It could
not be otherwise if there must be a world exclusively of sovereign states and
entirely devoid of colonies, protected states, associate states, or any
other nonsovereign jurisdictions.
This change arguably reflects the ascendancy of a highly accommodating international morality which, at its center, contains the principle of self-determination as an unqualified, universal human right of all
ex-colonial peoples. It is revealed perhaps most clearly in the 1960
UN Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, which affirmed that ‘‘all peoples have the right to selfdetermination’’ and that ‘‘inadequacy of political, economic, social, or
educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext for delaying
independence.’’39 Subsequently it has been disclosed by various UN Resolutions condemning colonialism as not only illegitimate but also illegal
and justifying anticolonial revolutions.40 In short, one cannot at the same
time have empirical qualifications on statehood and such a right institutionalized within the same international regime. Decolonization was
necessary to go from old facts to new rights.
Nowadays, at least in Africa *** the key if not the sole criterion of statehood is legal independence, based on the ground of self-determination,
which is of course a juridical and not an empirical condition. This is almost
exactly the reverse of historical practice. Sovereign statehood, as
39
40

Everyman’s United Nations (New York: United Nations, 1968), pp. 370–71.
See especially UN General Assembly Resolutions 2621, 2627, and 2708 of Session XXV,
1970, and 3103 of Session XXVII, 1973.

218

International Law and International Relations

previously indicated, originated both logically and historically as a de
facto independence between states.41 States had it ‘‘primordially’’: ‘‘the
nature of the sovereign state as constitutionally insular is analogous to
that of the individual as a developed personality, dependent indeed upon
society, yet at the same time inner-directed and self-contained.’’42 Traditional sovereignty was like the predemocratic franchise: it was determined
by capacities and competencies and therefore acknowledged inequality.
When sovereignty was linked to recognition in nineteenth-century positive international law, it was still based on the postulate that the recognized political entity was primordially capable of modern and civilized
government. Recognition was ‘‘a sort of juristic baptism.’’43 The analogy
rings true because of the reasonable assumption that the one being baptized had the marks and merits of a state. This was reflected in the small
number of independent as compared to dependent political systems. In
short, statehood was still prior to recognition. Even the practice of ‘‘constitutive recognition’’ was the acknowledgment of relevant political facts
which warranted the baptism of some but not all political entities. In
other words, sovereignty by its original nature was a privilege of the few
rather than a right of the many.
Today in *** Africa this relationship is reversed. Independence is
based primarily on an external universal right rather than an internal
particular reality. *** Juridical statehood divorced from the empirical
conditions of states now evidently has a place in international law.44
* * *

a new dual civil regime
These changes disclose the emergence of a new dual civil regime. According to Martin Wight, ‘‘the dual aspect of the states-system’’ was
41

42

43
44

The historical practice involved was expressed in early modern times by the new and
radical claim: Rex est imperator in regno suo – the king is emperor within his own realm.
See McIlwain, Political Thought, p. 268. Also see the brief but penetrating discussion in
Martin Wight, Power Politics, 2d ed. (Baltimore: Penguin Books and Royal Institute of
International Affairs, 1986), pp. 25–26.
Wight, Power Politics, p. 307. Also see Crawford, ‘‘Criteria for Statehood in International Law,’’ p. 96.
Crawford, ‘‘Criteria for Statehood in International Law,‘‘ p. 98.
Self-determination is part of the jus cogens according to Brownlie, Principle, p. 515.
He also notes (p. 75) that ‘‘self-determination will today be set against the concept
of effective government, more particularly when the latter is used in arguments
for continuation of colonial rule.’’

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

219

conceived originally, if tentatively, by Grotius. ‘‘There is an outer circle
that embraces all mankind, under natural law, and an inner circle, the
corpus Christianorum, bound by the law of Christ.’’45 Dualism in different
forms has persisted in international relations ever since. It is a very big
subject, of course, and as yet there exists no comprehensive account of
which I am aware.46 However, it is possible to review briefly the changing
images of dualism in international relations to gain some background
perspective on the dual civil regime which exists today and the place of
juridical statehood in it.
Three approximate ‘‘stages’’ are discernible in the development of international dualism. The first is that apprehended by Grotius: an outer or universal circle governing the relations of mankind and reflected in the jus
gentium; and an inner circle of international law among ChristianEuropean nations. Relations between the two spheres, between Europe
and the rest of the world, were nevertheless pragmatic politically, uncertain
morally, and untidy legally.47 They were conducted on a basis of rough
equality notwithstanding the accelerating inequality of power in favor of
Europe, and they expressed a fair measure of international toleration.
There was not yet anything resembling a global regime under common rules.
Insofar as European relations with Africa were concerned,
African heads of state had not yet been downgraded from Kings to Chiefs . . . .
African states were clearly not considered members of the family of nations. They
sent no accredited ambassadors to Europe and received none in return . . . .
Nevertheless, their legal rights were recognized in a series of treaties on which
the Europeans based their own rights to their footholds along the coast.48

It was a tentative and initially accommodating encounter between two
utterly different worlds, but Africa was a political world and not merely
terra nullias. Traditional continental Africa is far better characterized
by anthropology or sociology, however, than by political theory, jurisprudence, diplomatic history, or international law. It was a world of
societies more than states: ‘‘the nation-State in the European sense did
not really develop in Africa.’’49 Even ‘‘states’’ in the anthropological
45

46
47

48

49

M. Wight, ‘‘The Origins of Our States-system: Geographical Limits,’’ in Systems of States
(Leicester: University of Leicester Press, 1977), p. 128.
The closest to it is Bull and Watson, International Society.
Ian Brownlie, ‘‘The Expansion of International Society: The Consequences for the Law of
Nations,’’ in Bull and Watson, International Society, p. 359.
P. D. Curtin, The Image of Africa, vol. 1 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1964),
pp. 279–80.
Shaw, Title to Territory, p. 30.

220

International Law and International Relations

definition – centralized political systems – of which there were not a
large number, exercised uncertain control, and ‘‘the authority and power
of the central government faded away more and more the further one
went from the centre toward the boundary. Thus boundaries between
the states were vague, sometimes overlapping.’’50 Although there were
of course complex and particular customs which regulated intercourse
among contiguous local societies, ‘‘(t)here was no African international
system or international society extending over the continent as a whole,
and it is doubtful whether such terms can be applied even to particular
areas.’’51 Africa scarcely existed even as a politically recognizable, not
to mention a diplomatically recognized, international jurisdiction.
* * *
After the middle of the 19th century a new form of international dualism
appeared which was connected with European colonial expansion in Asia
and Africa: rough equality and diversity was replaced by precise hierarchy
and uniformity in the relations between European and non-European
countries, with the former in a position of superiority. The determination
of sovereignty throughout the world now derived from a Western and
specifically liberal concept of a civil state which postulated certain criteria
before international personality could be recognized. As previously indicated, these included the standard of ‘‘civilization’’ as well as effective
government. Europe had the power and the will to impose this conception
on the rest of the world. Even highly credible non-Western states which
were never colonized, such as Japan, had to assert their statehood in these
terms.52 The consequence – and arguably the design – was the establishment of numerous colonial dependencies in those parts of the world,
such as Africa, which were not considered to have any positive claim to
sovereignty on these grounds and could therefore legitimately and legally
be ruled by Europeans. The rules were clearly biased in favor of the
‘‘civilized,’’ who also happened to be the strong.53

50

51

52

53

J. Vansina, Kingdoms of the Savanna (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1966),
pp. 155–56. Also see Lucy Mair, African Kingdoms (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967),
chap. 1.
H. Bull, ‘‘European States and African Political Communities,’’ in Bull and Watson,
International Society, p. 106.
See Hidemi Suganami, ‘‘Japan’s Entry into International Society,’’ in Bull and Watson,
International Society, chap. 12.
‘‘[S]trong states accepted the legitimacy of colonialism and weak states would not
challenge the status quo.’’ Puchala and Hopkins, ‘‘International Regimes,’’ p. 75.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

221

For the first time the entire globe was organized in terms of European
international law: there was a single regime of world politics of which
colonialism was an integral institution. Dualism now consisted of a
superior inner circle of sovereign states which were recognized members
of the family of nations, and an inferior outer circle of their dependencies
in Asia, Africa, and Oceania. Apart from a few notable exceptions, such
as Turkey at first and later Japan, the inner circle was composed entirely
of European countries and their offspring in the Americas. This dualism
confined natural law, when it was not completely disregarded in a postAustinian era of positive law, exclusively to human relations. There was
no longer any generally acknowledged jus gentium. The very substantial
inequalities along with the obvious cultural differences between the
predominantly Western family of nations and the rest of the world –
differences also marked by the racial boundary between whites and
non-whites – were construed as distinctions of moral and political
significance and were reflected by international law.
The latest stage of international dualism was first intimated by
Wilsonian liberalism and specifically the League of Nations belief in ‘‘the
virtue of small states’’ and ‘‘the juridical equality of all states.’’54 The
League did not abandon empirical statehood, however, as indicated by,
among other things, the mandates system which was the internationalization of colonialism. That was the result of decolonization and
the extension of membership in the community of states and specifically
the UN, according to the principle of self-determination, to all dependencies which desired it regardless of any other considerations. This
international change was essentially normative and basically entailed
abolishing the international legal disabilities imposed on non-Western
peoples.
This new dualism is, of course, the current North-South division, which
can be defined in jurisprudential as well as political economy terms. It
contains two fundamentally different bases of sovereign statehood. The
first is the traditional empirical foundation of the competitive statessystem which still exists in the developed parts of the world and can be
extended only by development and not by constitutional legerdemain.
International standing in this familiar sphere is determined primarily by
military power and alliances, socioeconomic capabilities and resources,
internal unity and legitimacy, science and technology, education and
54

See the perennially apposite discussion in Alfred Cobban, The Nation State and National
Self-Determination (New York: Crowell, 1969), chap. 4.

222

International Law and International Relations

welfare, and various other familiar constituents of empirical statehood.55 ***
The second is the contemporary moral-legal framework of the accommodative juridical regime which has been fashioned for the most marginal
parts of the ex-colonial world and particularly Africa, where extreme
underdevelopment still prevails and empirical statehood has yet to be
solidly established in most cases. States in this sphere survive primarily
by negative sovereignty: the right not to be interfered with that is institutionalized in international law.56 Reinforcing this negative liberty is
the contemporary belief in the inherent equality of all peoples regardless
of their empirical capabilities and credibilities as organized political
systems. ***
What is fundamentally changed internationally, therefore, is not the
distribution of empirical statehood in the world: that is still located in
the developed West, *** although shifting perceptibly and in some cases
rapidly in the direction of East Asia and a few other substantially developing parts of the Third World. Rather, it is the moral and legal basis of the
states-system which has changed in the direction of equality – particularly
racial equality.57 The revolution of the new states is a revolution primarily
of international legitimacy and law. ***
The biases in the constitutive rules of the sovereignty game today favor
the weak. ‘‘For the first time in human history, international law is not on
the side of force and power. The novelty of our time resides in the signal
divorce between law and force.’’58 To this observation of Mohammed
Bedjaoui, an Algerian anti-imperialist lawyer and diplomat, one should
add that the divorce is also between international legitimacy and national
capability, between juridical statehood and empirical statehood. Sovereignty is today the political currency of the weak. *** ‘‘It is by insisting
upon their privileges of sovereignty that they are able to defend their
newly won independence.’’59 Why was the international enfranchisement
of the weak undertaken? Equality is infectious, as Lynn Miller points out,
and once empirical requirements on sovereignty are relaxed to admit
55

56
57
58

59

See the brilliant analysis in E. L. Jones, The European Miracle (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981), chaps. 6 and 7.
See Jackson, ‘‘Negative Sovereignty in Sub-Saharan Africa.’’
See R. J. Vincent, ‘‘Racial Equality,’’ in Bull and Watson, International Society, chap. 16.
M. Bedjaoui, ‘‘A Third World View of International Organization,’’ in G. Abi-Saab, ed.,
The Concept of International Organization (Paris: UNESCO, 1981), p. 207.
H. Bull, ‘‘The State’s Positive Role in World Affairs,’’ Daedalus, The State 108 (1979),
p. 121.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

223

some new members ‘‘the tendency is irresistible to qualify still other
members of the society as well’’ until virtually everyone is a member.60
Decolonization was driven by this international moral pressure.
And why in so many cases was juridical statehood necessary as a vehicle of equal sovereignty? It is, of course, impossible to give anything
more than a brief answer in passing. Africa, as already indicated, developed very few organized indigenous governments which were recognizable as modern states and even fewer which were demonstrably as
capable. Arguably because there is so little useful and relevant political
tradition at the level of international society, it was necessary to invent
juridical statehood based on colonial boundaries to incorporate the
region into the community of states. ***

juridical statehood and international theory
What are the implications of this dual regime for international theory?
If this is indeed a new practice, as I have argued, then its corresponding
theory must also be novel to some degree. The question can be addressed
in terms of Martin Wight’s theoretical categories of ‘‘rationalism,’’ ‘‘realism,’’ and ‘‘revolutionism.’’61 They are tokens for international constitutionalist theory (Grotius), national interest theory (Machiavelli), and
universalist community-of-mankind theory (Kant) *** usage as far as
possible.62 Kant in particular is in important respects a forerunner of
the contemporary constructivist variety of rationalism.63

Classical Theory
The classical theory of the states-system is a rationalist-realist theory of
collision prevention which has a direct analog in the traditional liberal
60

61

62

63

Lynn H. Miller, Global Order: Values and Power in International Politics (Boulder and
London: Westview Press, 1985), p. 49.
H. Bull, ‘‘Martin Wight and the Theory of International Relations,’’ British Journal of
International Studies 2 (1976), pp. 104–5.
See, for example, the conceptual controversies surrounding the notion of ‘‘neorealism’’ in
Robert O. Keohane, ed., Neorealism and Its Critics (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1986), especially the contributions by Richard Ashley, Robert Keohane, and
Robert Gilpin.
See, for example, Charles R. Beitz, Political Theory and International Relations
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), which draws upon the neo-Kantian
philosophy of John Rawls.

224

International Law and International Relations

theory of politics between individuals and groups within states. Classical
liberals are realists as well as rationalists. Political good is that which
protects the freedom and property of agents: peace, order, and justice.
Realists place the emphasis upon power and deterrence, whereas rationalists underline international law. *** Although Hobbes is in some
respects a proponent of absolute government, his civil theory has many
earmarks of classical liberalism.64 As we know, however, he saw no
evidence of an international civil society. Hobbes is a realist. *** He
assumes, nevertheless, that not only humans but also states as a result of
the social contract have intrinsic value, and he notes how sovereigns in
providing for the security of their subjects have ‘‘their weapons pointed,
and their eyes fixed on one another.’’65 Positive sovereignty for Hobbes is
the source of the good life.
Grotius, the rationalist, is more explicit about the value of a state,
which is ‘‘a complete association of free men, joined together for the
enjoyment of rights and for their common interest.’’66 States are valuable,
according to Hersch Lauterpacht in his definitive essay on Grotius, not
because they are ‘‘like individuals’’ but because they are ‘‘composed of
individual human beings. This is the true meaning of the Grotian analogy
of states and individuals.’’67 *** For the classical rationalists, state
presuppose international civil society and they become subjects of the
international law they contract with one another. The sovereign is
a constitutionalist not only domestically but also internationally.
* * *
For Kant, traditional customary international law, which might produce order and periodical peace, is not enough to achieve perpetual
peace, which is ‘‘the highest political good.’’68 It is necessary, therefore,
to form a peace union of constitutional or ‘‘republican’’ states. Only
such states, owing to their domestic civil character, would subscribe to
a universal morality – the categorical imperative based on an international social contract – and refrain from war, which is the greatest
64

65
66

67

68

This is a major feature of Michael Oakeshott’s interpretation of Hobbes. See his Hobbes
on Civil Association (Oxford: Blackwell, 1975), chap. 1.
Hobbes, Leviathan.
Hugo Grotius, De Jure Belli et Pacis Libri, trans. F. Kelsey (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1925), vol. 1, chap. 1, section xiv.
Hersch Lauterpacht, ‘‘The Grotian Tradition in International Law,’’ in Falk, Kratochwil
and Mendlovitz, International Law, p. 19.
Immanuel Kant, Perpetual Peace (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill/Library of Liberal Arts,
1957), Addendum, p. 59.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

225

political evil. Sovereignty and its built-in hubris would be transcended
by a universal community of mankind, and the ultimate political
good would finally be realized.69 Juridical statehood and the new
dualism can profitably be interrogated from each of these theoretical
perspectives.
Rationalism
Charles Alexandrowicz and others argue that juridical statehood in some
cases is a reversion to natural law practice in international relations.70
Nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century positive law was an
interregnum in an older Grotian tradition which postulated the universality of the law of nations, self-determination, and non-discrimination in
disregard of civilization, religion, race, or color. These principles arguably are ‘‘revived in different shape’’ within the UN legal framework.
Alexandrowicz sees this argument as applying to some traditional Asian
states but not to most African countries, which are new state entities.
N. L. Wallace-Bruce argues, to the contrary, that colonialism interrupted the sovereignty of traditional African states and placed it ‘‘into
an eclipse’’ but did not terminate it. Thus, African independence was
also a reversion to sovereignty and not an attempt to create it for the first
time.71 The difficulty with this argument is the fact that in the vast
majority of cases sovereignty in Africa has never reverted to anything remotely resembling traditional states. It has been acquired by ex-colonies
which were, as indicated, novel and arbitrary European creations. Most
African governments consequently have no authority by virtue of succession to traditional states. One cannot therefore argue that juridical statehood has restored and is protecting the traditional political identities
and values of the non-Western world which were the historical subjects
of natural law prior to Western imperialism. The new sovereignty, as indicated to the contrary, is far more often undermining and even destroying non-Western political tradition than protecting it.72
69
70

71

72

Ibid., Second Article, pp. 16–20.
C. H. Alexandrowicz, ‘‘New and Original States: The Issue of Reversion to Sovereignty,’’
International Affairs 45 (1969), pp. 465–80, and, by the same author, ‘‘The New States
and International Law,’’ Millenium 3 (1977), pp. 226–33.
N. L. Wallace-Bruce, ‘‘Africa and International Law: The Emergence to Statehood,’’
Journal of Modern African Studies 23 (1985), pp. 575–602.
See Walker Connor, ‘‘Nation-Building or Nation-Destroying,’’ World Politics 24, no. 3
(1972), pp. 319–355.

226

International Law and International Relations

Instead of postulating the existence of states which already afford the
good life to inhabitants, the new Third World sovereignty presupposes that
international society can promote state-building. Juridical statehood is more
appropriately understood, therefore, as a constructive rather than a restorative rationalism. This is an idealist practice and theory which has little in
common with the realist and empiricist tendency of classical rationalism.73
It is a novel twentieth-century and indeed mainly post–World War II
international doctrine. It is now part of the conventional wisdom of the
international community and is evident, for example, not only in negative
sovereignty but also in the positive law of the sea, the principles of
UN-CTAD, the Group of 77, international aid, and the North-South dialogue generally.74 In short, an unprecedented regime of cooperative international law and action has been created, arguably out of necessity, to
generate and accommodate a greatly expanded international society
containing numerous quasi-states.
Constructivist rationalism is what Burke would call an ‘‘innovation’’:
a revolutionary break with the settled international practices of the
past.75 In the contemporary international community, unlike that before
World War II, membership is gained more by abstract right than by
historical and sociological reason. Protection is afforded and assistance
provided for what might valuably exist someday but not for what is
necessarily of real value today. It is not a small but otherwise complete
state which is being protected, in character with Vattel’s famous remark
that a dwarf is a man, but rather a quasi-state which someday might be
developed into a real state. This is Grotius turned on his head: inverted
rationalism.76
Realism
Juridical statehood, at first glance, presents difficulties of strict realism
because it discloses toleration of powerless quasi-states, *** on the
grounds of their absolute claim to sovereignty. Is realism not lurking
73

74

75

76

See F. A. Hayek, ‘‘Kinds of Rationalism,’’ Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967), chap. 5.
See the excellent analysis of these tendencies by Robert A. Mortimer, The Third World
Coalition in International Politics, 2d ed. (Boulder and London: Westview Press, 1984).
Edmund Burke, ‘‘Letter to a Noble Lord,’’ in F. W. Rafferty, ed., The Works of Edmund
Burke, vol. VI (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1928), pp. 46–7.
It is perhaps a parallel to what Wight identified as ‘‘inverted revolutionism,’’ which is
the ‘‘pacifist stream’’ of international thought. See Bull, ‘‘Martin Wight and the Theory
of International Relations,’’ p. 106.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

227

somewhere in the background, however? For example, is juridical statehood not a consequence perhaps of Africa’s lack of global significance in
the balance of power between East and West? Can realism account for the
existence of quasi-states and the contemporary dual international regime? *** The balance of power and other aspects of the competition
among real states, which is a game of hardball, are virtually independent of
quasi-stateland. Thus, *** United States national security policy could be
effective with little real knowledge of Black Africa. This may or may not
please Black governments, but their attitude can cause little concern. Such
knowledge is incidental more than instrumental to the East-West game of
hardball. They are spectators rather than players in that game.
Realists might therefore argue that juridical statehood is an instance
of uninterested toleration on the part of the real states of the world. The
indifference of the major powers enabled African states to become
independent, so the argument goes, and it enables them to continue to
exist despite their obvious debilities. ‘‘Indifference’’ belongs to the language of power and interest rather than legitimacy and law. Juridical
statehood, by this reasoning, *** is only a facade on power: the quasistates are states by courtesy only because nothing vital is at stake for those
extending the courtesy. Realism is therefore not refuted or even undermined by juridical statehood and the new international dualism.
The argument is persuasive as far as it goes. Once juridical statehood
is acquired, however, diplomatic courtesies and niceties are set in motion which support it, exaggerate it, and conceal its lack of real substance
and value. A new international community is inaugurated. Quasi-states
are dressed in the robes of sovereignty. An international law of selfdetermination and cooperation is created as well as programs of international aid and other actions for the benefit of the underdeveloped
world. A language of global justice and injustice is applied to North–
South relations. A new moral-legal regime comes into existence. The Third
World states acquire and exercise a political voice in world affairs.77 ***
This is the proprietary ‘‘reality’’ which supports juridical statehood.
‘‘Propriety,’’ of course, belongs to the language of morality rather than
power. It is not about power – certainly not in the classical sense of
Machiavelli and Morgenthau. It is about status, equality, respect, dignity,
decorum, courtesy, and so forth, which is civil conduct characteristic of
the life of clubs: international relations in a community of states. Many
Third World states may amount to little of real substance internationally
77

See Mortimer, Third World Coalition, especially chap. 1.

228

International Law and International Relations

as yet. They do not have to be substantial, however, because they enjoy a
universally recognized categorical right of international existence. Numbers and voices of international democracy can be mobilized and organized
to count for something today. *** This is what Bedjaouis is referring to in
claiming that international law is no longer on the side of force.
*** The era of gunboat diplomacy, of speaking softly and carrying a big
stick, seems decidedly outdated and increasingly inconceivable in the
practical relations of the developed and the underdeveloped worlds.78
The famous theoretical remark of Thucydides – that ‘‘the strong do what
they can and the weak suffer what they must’’ – after many centuries of
unquestionable applicability, likewise no longer seems as solidly based.79
Arguably this international legitimism at least qualifies realism as a theory of pseudo-states.
This argument is consistent with others that identify normative limits of
realism – or neorealism – in international theory.80 However, this is certainly
not to imply that realism is outmoded. On the contrary, it remains crucial to
an understanding of the international system *** where the balance of
power and other instrumental facets of the game of hardball are still
strongly in evidence. It is only to say that in some quarters today and
particularly the area of North-South relations a different game more like
softball is now being played. This may, of course, be an instance of
suspended realism only. *** Juridical statehood could be among the first
casualties if Third World peripheries again became objects of intense rivalry
by the major powers as was the case in the late nineteenth century. At this
time, however, it does appear more like a regime change than a temporary
historical aberration.
Revolutionism
None of this yet addresses arguments characteristic of revolutionism
in the Kantian sense of universal morality or what today is understood
78

79
80

The skeptic might point to the recent U.S. interventions in Grenada and Libya or the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. In the former case, however, the Association of East
Caribbean states solicited it and the U.S. justified it partly on these grounds. Moreover,
most of the world, including many members of NATO, condemned it. In the latter case,
Libya is clearly viewed widely not only in the West but also in the nonaligned world as
a rogue elephant: an unpredictable international outcast that will not reciprocate. The
Soviet Union also claimed that its intervention in Afghanistan was solicited – although it
had evidently enthroned the communist regime which made the request.
The Peloponnesian War (New York: Modern Library, 1950), p. 331.
See the various selections in Keohane, Neorealism.

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

229

as international human rights.81 At first glance much positive international law and organization, especially that which addresses development rights, appears consistent with Kantian theory. It expresses
a universal morality reminiscent of the New Testament teachings on
what the rich owe to the poor. It is couched in a moral language
concerning positive rights of subsistence and positive duties to materially
assist beyond borders which is widely and fluently spoken by international practitioners and theoretical commentators alike.82 It therefore denies that human obligations end at international frontiers. It
seeks to ameliorate if not eliminate underdevelopment. It has given rise
to an elaborate superstructure of international aid targeted at Third
World poverty which is historically unprecedented and can be read as
the ascendancy of a cosmopolitan moral community higher than the
community of states. In short, it expresses the heightened awareness of
people living in the developed quarter of the world of what people in
other quarters are suffering which is precisely consistent with Kant’s
concern to make ‘‘a violation of law and right in one place felt in all
others.’’83
In practice, however, contemporary positive international law does
not and cannot transcend juridical statehood. On the contrary, it
postulates it. The duties and obligations acknowledged by it are those
not of individuals but of states. If sovereigns object to international
policies intended to mitigate human suffering within their borders,
perhaps traceable to their own actions or omissions, there is no
legitimate or legal basis for overruling them. *** Indeed, as R. J. Vincent
puts it, in the community of states ‘‘righteous intervention will be
received as imperialism.’’84 International borders still intervene strongly
81

82

83

84

The structuralist image of international relations, Marxist or non-Marxist, in which
horizontal socioeconomic divisions take precedence over vertical state divisions is a nonKantian variant of revolutionism which I do not have the space to consider. For recent
analyses see Ralph Pettman, ‘‘Competing Paradigms in International Politics,’’ Review of
International Studies 7 (1981), pp. 39–49, and, by the same author, State and Class: A
Sociology of International Affairs (London: Croom Helm, 1979). For a characteristically
brilliant essay pertinent to this discussion, see Ali Mazrui, ‘‘Africa Entrapped: Between
the Protestant Ethic and the Legacy of Westphalia,’’ in Bull and Watson, International
Society, chap. 19.
See, for example, Henry Shue, Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence and U.S. Foreign
Policy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980).
As quoted and discussed in R. J. Vincent, Human Rights and International Relations
(New York: The Royal Institute of International Affairs and Cambridge University Press,
1986), p. 118.
Vincent, Human Rights, p. 118.

230

International Law and International Relations

with individual right and duties.85 Moreover, when *** international aid
transfers are made they are made either between states or with the
permission of the recipient state. Individual or private transfers can only
be undertaken in stealth if they do not have the sanction of targeted
sovereign states.
We live in a world entirely enclosed by equal sovereignty. International aid is profoundly affected by this juridical consideration. On closer
inspection development rights look more like sovereign’s rights than
human rights. The fact of the matter is that southern sovereignty can
direct development aid and even redirect it into the pockets of ruling elites.
If northern countries could intervene when this happened, then the new
sovereignty would be undermined and we would be witnessing a return
to the old game of imperialism in which the developed states could
legitimately dictate to the underdeveloped in matters affecting their
domestic jurisdiction. Juridical statehood only embraces distributive
justice insofar as it conforms to the rights of Third World sovereigns.
The morality and the elaborate superstructure of international aid which is
targeted specifically at countries rather than individuals is inconsistent
with Kantian morality.
Kantianism, however, is primarily concerned with individual morality –
classical natural rights – in international relations. It is revolutionary
because it postulates the priority of human rights over sovereign’s rights,
which are secondary claims. The ultimate moral agents are individuals.
The only authentic moral community is mankind. When statesmen
claim rights above individuals or justify their exercise of power in violation
of natural rights, injustice is committed. Kantianism, by subordinating
sovereign rights to human rights, is therefore revolutionary in regard to
the community of states.
Kant’s vision of a community of mankind is incipiently evident today
only among select developed states, particularly those of the European
community, which have freely suspended although not permanently
revoked their sovereignty in regard to some important civil rights. They
have set up a wholly independent *** European Court of Human Rights
which can sit in judgment of them in questions of human rights violations. Moreover, these bodies can hear cases brought by individuals
against states and deliver binding judgments. ‘‘All this amounts to a
85

See the characteristically subtle and discerning analysis by Stanley Hoffman, Duties
Beyond Borders: On the Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Politics
(Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1981).

Quasi-States, Dual Regimes, and Neoclassical Theory

231

substantial retreat from the previously sacred principle of national
sovereignty.’’86 *** Arguably this achievement has been possible only
in a region where domestic democracy and the rule of law is now widely
entrenched. It is a historical confirmation of Kant’s belief that international humanitarianism is most likely in a league of constitutional states.
This can be contrasted with the UN human rights regime and the
situation in Africa. Most UN human rights covenants, which are procedurally slack and deferential to member states, have been ratified and
implemented to date only by a minority of those states. The 1981 African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, *** explicitly acknowledges the
supremacy of sovereign states by differentiating ‘‘peoples’’’ rights from
human rights. It is evident that ‘‘peoples’ rights’’ is a code word for excolonial self-determination and therefore sovereign’s rights (Articles 19
and 20). *** The weakness and equivocation of both the UN and the
African human rights regimes confirms an inference from Kant’s belief:
namely that international humanitarianism is not likely to be advanced
by a league of authoritarian states.
This interrogation of juridical statehood by Kantian revolutionism
suggests that negative sovereignty is well entrenched in Africa and
probably other parts of the Third World. At most, a kind of encapsulated
revolutionism is evident in which positive laws and organizations of
international humanitarianism exist but are subject to the sovereignty of
southern governments. In North-South relations the Kantian revolution
has yet to occur, and at present there is little prospect that it will soon
happen. Revolutionism is therefore a weak theory in the terms of this
article: it is recommendatory more than explanatory. In this regard,
however, it is very Kantian.87

conclusion
Perhaps the threads of these remarks can now be drawn together.
Although realism and revolutionism are certainly relevant, as I have
86

87

Paul Sieghart, The Lawful Rights of Mankind (New York: Oxford University Press,
1986), p. 68.
‘‘For my part, I put my trust in the theory of what the relationships between men and
states ought to be according to the principle of right. On the cosmopolitan level too,
whatever reason shows to be valid in theory, is also valid in practice.’’ Immanuel Kant,
‘‘On the Relationship of Theory to Practice in International Right,’’ reprinted in Hans
Reiss, ed., Kant’s Political Writings (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1977),
p. 92.

232

International Law and International Relations

indicated, the classical international theory most apposite to African
quasi-states and the external order which sustains them at this time is one
which places sovereignty at the forefront of analysis: rationalism.
Neither Machiavellianism nor Kantianism adequately captures the practice of juridical statehood. This is only part of the story, however. As
indicated, modern rationalist theories of Third World states are inclined
to be inverted and idealist in character, unlike traditional European
rationalism, which was far more empiricist and realist. If this observation has validity, rationalist theory today at least as regards sovereignty
in the Third World is primarily disclosed not as a Grotian theory
concerned with protecting the intrinsic value of existing states but as a
constructivist theory aimed at creating political value and developing
new states.
Rationalism, realism, and revolutionism have a designated place of
long standing in the theory of international relations. The point is locating their appropriate and relative position at any historical period. To
reduce international theory to any one mode would be to limit the subject
unduly. It would be like trying to operate effectively in practical political
life only with the language of power or the language of law or the language of morality. Many political goods and certainly the good life would
be unobtainable. One could not achieve in practice the modern constitutional democratic state which requires all of these languages. Likewise
in theory. Methodological pluralism, although it obviously sacrifices
parsimony and elegance, more than makes up for it by affording balance
and comprehensiveness. This is, of course, the point of Martin Wight and
others who write about international relations in a pluralist manner, as
Hedley Bull observes: ‘‘the essence of his teaching was that the truth
about international politics had to be sought not in any one of these
patterns of thought but in the debate among them.’’88 Methodological
pluralism seeks to be faithful to the observed pluralism of international
political life.
* * *
88

Bull, ‘‘Martin Wight and the Theory of International Relations,’’ p. 110.

11
Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘‘Failure’’
of Internationalism
Jeffrey W. Legro

International relations theorists have in recent years shown an interest in international norms and rules not equaled since the interwar
period.1 This contemporary literature is, of course, quite different – ie.,
better – than that of the 1920s and 1930s: it has greater intellectual
depth, empirical backing, and explanatory power. The promise of this
research, bolstered by the opportunities of the post–cold war era, is that
norms encouraging free trade, protecting the environment, enhancing
human rights, and controlling the spread and use of heinous weapons
may have a substantial impact on the conduct and structure of international relations. But pessimists also exist. Some have taken up the stick
E. H. Carr skillfully shook at idealists in an earlier period, arguing
that the anarchic power-shaped international arena is not so malleable
and that international norms and institutions have relatively little influence.2 On the one hand, we are pointed to the centrality of international
norms; on the other, we are cautioned that norms are inconsequential.
How do we make sense of these divergent claims? Which is right?

1

2

For examples, see Axelrod 1986; Kratochwil 1989; Ray 1989; Nadelmann 1990; Goertz
and Diehl 1992; Finnemore 1993; Reed and Kaysen 1993; Thomson 1993, 1994; Mayall
1990; Goldstein and Keohane 1993; Jackson 1993; Sikkink 1993; Paul, 1995; Price 1995;
Klotz 1995; Gelpi 1995; Katzenstein 1996; Finnemore 1996a; and Cortell and Davis in
press.
Carr 1946. For an example, see Mearsheimer 1994–95, 7.

For their help on the ideas presented below, I am grateful to James Davis, Colin Elman,
Hein Goemans, Paul Kowert, John Odell, Ido Oren, Richard Price, Brian Taylor, Mark
Zacher, participants at seminars at Harvard University’s Olin Institute and Brown University’s Watson Institute, and several anonymous reviewers for International Organization.

233

234

International Law and International Relations

I argue that neither of the polarized positions is sustainable. Contrary
to what the skeptics assert, norms do indeed matter. But norms do not
necessarily matter in the ways or often to the extent that their proponents have argued. The literature on norms has generally misspecified their impact because of several conceptual and methodological
biases. In short, by concentrating on showing that norms ‘‘matter,’’
analysts have given short shrift to the critical issues of which norms
matter, the ways they matter, and how much they matter relative to
other factors. The result has been a misguided sense of the range and
depth of the impact of international norms. The social focus of norm
analysis is indeed central, but recent analyses have overemphasized international prescriptions while neglecting norms that are rooted in other
types of social entities – e.g., regional, national, and subnational groups.
This oversight has led scholars to ignore significant subsystemic
social understandings that can contradict and overwhelm international
prescriptions.
To assess the promise and limits of focusing on norms, I draw on a set
of cases involving the use of force where the conventional wisdom expects little impact from international prescriptions – that is, ‘‘least likely’’
cases.3 Furthermore, the study focuses on a time period (the interwar and
World War II years) that the standard historiography of international
relations theory sees as decisively refuting ideational internationalism.4
In the 1920s and 1930s, the international community stigmatized three
types of warfare as heinous and immoral: submarine attacks against
merchant ships, the bombing of nonmilitary targets, and the use of
chemical weapons. These prohibitory norms are interesting (and similar
to current efforts) because they were not simply part of the ‘‘deep structure’’ of the international system or ‘‘invisible’’ to the participants but
instead were explicit objects of construction by states that later had to
weigh the desirability of adherence versus violation. Yet, during World
War II, these prohibitions had varying effects. Participants ignored
the submarine warfare restrictions almost immediately. They respected
strategic bombing rules for months and then violated them. But they
upheld limitations on chemical weapons, despite expectations and
preparations, throughout the war. Why were some norms apparently
influential and not others?

3
4

See Eckstein 1975; and King, Keohane, and Verba 1994, 209–10.
For example, see Bull 1972.

Which Norms Matter?

235

Contrary to the conventional historiography, I argue that international norms were consequential for the use of force during World
War II. The prohibitions shaped states’ calculations and tactics, inspired leaders’ justifications and rationalizations, and, most fundamentally, appear to be a key reason why certain means of warfare were
even considered for restraint. Yet while international norms certainly
mattered, a norm explanation cannot account for the variation that
occurred in the use of force. The explanation is not that strategic security
concerns overwhelmed social prescriptions, since neither the military
effectiveness of the weapons nor opportunities for relative strategic
advantage can explain the differential adherence of states to the three
norms. Instead, it lies in an understanding of organizational culture. This
approach does emphasize collective prescriptions, but the focus is on
national society rather than on international norms. The dominant
beliefs in military organizations about the appropriate ways to fight
wars shaped how soldiers thought about and prepared for war, which in
turn shaped the varying impact of norms on state aims.
This analysis has several implications for international relations
theory. First, it demonstrates the value of providing clear concepts, of
examining both effective and ineffective norms, and of considering alternative explanations – methodological additions that can advance
both positivist and intrepretivist norm research. Second, its results
show the benefits of analyzing competing norm, belief, and cultural
patterns in international politics. Although many recent accounts
have usefully focused on global norms, few have examined such international injunctions in the context of national norms. Yet these
intrastate prescriptions (i.e., those of organizational culture) can wield
great influence. This, of course, is not to suggest that bureaucratic
culture always supersedes international norms or relative power constraints, but it does highlight the need for conceptual tools to weigh
the cross-cutting or synthetic effects of different types of cultural and
material structures.
The article takes shape in four parts. First, it outlines the limitations
of the extant norm literature and develops an approach that seeks to
address those shortcomings. Second, it discusses the logic of a competing
view based on organizational culture. It then assesses how persuasively
these two perspectives explain state preferences on adherence to norms
limiting the use of force in World War II. Finally, it addresses the implications of the argument for international relations theory, especially future
work on norms.

236

International Law and International Relations

on norms
Across a range of theoretical and methodological orientations, scholars
have shown a renewed interest in the ways that norms – collective
understandings of the proper behavior of actors – operate in international
politics. Norms are seen as continuous, rather than dichotomous, entities:
they do not just exist or not exist but instead come in varying strengths.
Analysts typically portray norms as consequential in terms of either constituting, regulating, or enabling actors or their environments.5 In any of
these roles, the central proposition is that norms that are more robust
will be more influential regardless of whether the dependent variable is
identity, interests, individual behavior, or collective practices and outcomes. Yet in exploring these relationships, the extant norm literature
has been prone to three types of biases.6
The first is a failure to conceptualize norm robustness independent
of the very effects attributed to norms, thus leading to tautology. This
failure is compounded because analysts must confront not a dearth but
an apparent profusion of norms in the international arena. Given this
availability, one can almost always identify a norm to ‘‘explain’’ or ‘‘allow’’
a particular effect. Since different norms can have competing or even
contradictory imperatives, it is important to understand why some
norms are more influential than others in particular situations. Thus,
whether one emphasizes the behavioral or the linguistic/discursive facet
of norms, avoiding circular reasoning requires a notion of norm robustness that is independent of the effects to be explained. This is not an easy
task. For example, Alexander Wendt suggests that social structures
(of shared knowledge) vary in the degree to which they can be transformed, but he does not specify what defines this trait.7 In different
ways, both Robert Keohane and Friedrich Kratochwil link a norm’s
potency to its institutionalization.8 But this pushes the problem back to
one of theorizing the robustness of institutions, an exercise that has been
prone to ambiguity or definition by effect.
A second problem is that efforts to explore norms suffer from a bias
toward the norm that ‘‘worked.’’ Most studies of norms focus on a single,
specific norm – or, at most, on a small set of norms. Typically, the norms
5
6

7
8

See Kratochwil and Ruggie 1986; Kratochwil 1989, 26; and Dessler 1989, 454–58.
Thanks to Paul Kowert for his contribution to this section. For a developed discussion
on the strengths and weaknesses of norm research, see Kowert and Legro 1996.
Wendt 1995, 80.
Keohane 1989, 4–5; Kratochwil 1989, 62.

Which Norms Matter?

237

under consideration are ‘‘effective’’ norms that seem to have obvious
consequences.9 Yet, in order to understand how norms operate, studies
must allow for more variation: the success or failure, existence or
obsolescence of norms. Research on norms has tended to overlook the
emerging rules, principles, prohibitions, and understandings that might
have had influence but did not. These cases, analyzed in conjunction
with comparable cases of norm effectiveness, are critical to the development of this line of thinking.10 Why norms did not emerge or were not
consequential is as important as why they did or were.
The final (but less pervasive) problem of many studies is a neglect of
alternative explanations, particularly ideational ones, for the effects attributed to norms. The dangers of not doing so are apparent. One risks
spuriously crediting international norms with consequences (e.g., the
shaping or enabling of particular identities, interests, beliefs, or actions)
that are better explained by other types of factors.
I attempt to avoid these biases by developing an explicit scheme for
assessing norm strength; by comparing norms that seem to have been very
effectual, such as those proscribing chemical warfare (CW), with those
that were less so, such as those concerning submarine warfare and strategic bombing; and by explicitly contrasting a norm approach with an
alternative organizational culture explanation and, to a lesser degree,
a conventional realist account.
To gauge the robustness of the norms, I propose a conceptualization
based on three criteria: specificity, durability, and concordance.11 These
three traits are, in principle, as applicable to informal institutions as they
are to formal ones. Specificity refers to how well the guidelines for
restraint and use are defined and understood. Is there a laborious code
that is overly complex or ill-defined or is it relatively simple and precise?
Do countries argue about what the restraints entail or how to implement
them? Specificity is thus assessed by examining actors’ understandings of
the simplicity and clarity of the prohibition.
Durability denotes how long the rules have been in effect and how
they weather challenges to their prohibitions. Have the norms had

9

10
11

See, for example, Ray 1989; Finnemore 1993; Jackson 1993; Thomson 1994; Price 1995;
Klotz 1995; and Price and Tannenwald 1996.
Examples include Nadelmann 1990; and McElroy 1992.
Though this is my own schema, it is influenced by traits often implicit in discussions
of norms and in the institutionalist literature, for example, Keohane 1989, 4–5; Smith
1989, 234–36; and Young 1989, 23.

238

International Law and International Relations

long-standing legitimacy? Are violators or violations penalized, thus
reinforcing and reproducing the norm? Violations of a norm do not
necessarily invalidate it, as is seen, for example, in cases of incest. The
issue is whether actors are socially or self-sanctioned for doing so.
These questions can be assessed by examining the history of a prohibition
and agents’ related understanding of and reaction to violations.
Concordance means how widely accepted the rules are in diplomatic
discussions and treaties (that is, the degree of intersubjective agreement).
The concordance dimension may be a sword that cuts both ways.
Public efforts to reaffirm a norm may be a sign, not that it is viable, but
instead that it is weakening. Which is the case may depend on its context.
In the cases examined here, affirmation is more reinforcing because
the focus is largely on ‘‘nascent’’ or evolving norms where affirmation
seems to contribute to robustness. Do states seem to concur on the
acceptability of the rules? Do they affirm their approval by committing
reputations to public ratification? Do states put special conditions on
their acceptance of prohibitions, thus diminishing concordance? Or do
they take the rules for granted, never even considering violating their
prescriptions? These questions can be assessed by reviewing the records
of national and international discussions that involve the norms.
Overall, the expectation of the norm approach developed above is
that the clearer, more durable, and more widely endorsed a prescription
is, the greater will be its impact. With respect to the variation in World
War II, this suggests, ceteris paribus, that states’ adherence to norms is
most likely in areas where norms are most robust in terms of specificity,
durability, and concordance. Conversely, where norms are less robust,
states will be more inclined toward violations. If a norm account is right,
we should see restraint in those areas where prohibitions are most
developed. States’ expectations of future use should shift as the accord
becomes more ingrained as part of international society. Leaders should
make reference to the norm in making decisions and recognize the penalties of nonadherence. Alternatively, the norm may be so robust, violation
of it is not even considered. Countries should react to constrain transgressions of principles, especially ones that are clear, long-standing, and
widely endorsed. In those areas where agreements have not been concluded or are thinly developed, restraint is more likely to break down. The
costs of violation will be seen as nonprohibitive. Leaders will attempt to
cut corners on restrictions. The related norms will not be identified with
self-interest or identity. In short, the effect of prohibitions on actors,
decision making, and practices will be minimal.

Which Norms Matter?

239

organizational culture
An alternative approach to understanding the varying use of force in
World War II comes from a conjunction of cultural and organization
theory. An organizational culture approach focuses on the way that the
pattern of assumptions, ideas, and beliefs that prescribes how a group
should adapt to its external environment and manage its internal affairs
influences calculations and actions.12 In a sense, this approach focuses
on ‘‘norms’’ that dominate specific organizations: culture is, in effect,
a set of collectively held prescriptions about the right way to think and
act.13 Applied to military bureaucracies, an organizational culture
perspective highlights how government agencies tasked with vague
formal purposes (‘‘provide security’’) concentrate on modes of warfare
that subsequently condition organizational thinking and behavior. Their
dominant way of war tends to become such a locus of activity that, in
effect, means become ends.14 Culture shapes how organizations understand their environment: it acts as a heuristic filter for perception and
calculation much the same way a theoretical paradigm shapes intellectual thought or a schema structures individual cognition.15 Culture also
has material consequences. Collective beliefs dictate which capabilities
are perceived as better and are worthy of support. Organizations will
channel resources to weapons suited to culture. Those weapons will
appear more feasible than those that are incompatible with culture and
that are subsequently deprived of funding and attention.16
* * *
*** Governments, however, consist of multiple agencies, so the
question is which bureaucracies will matter and when? The brief answer
offered here is that a bureaucracy’s impact varies with what I call its
organizational salience, consisting of at least three dimensions: the extent
to which the bureaucracy has monopoly power on expertise, the complexity of the issue, and the time period available for action. When one
organization has a monopoly on expertise and no competitors, it faces
less pressure to change and no checks on organizational biases. In terms of
complexity, the intricacy of an issue affects the degree to which specialist
12
13

14
15
16

This definition is loosely based on Schein 1985, 9.
For a thoughtful review of the work on culture in security affairs, see Johnston 1995.
Kier 1996 provides an excellent analysis of organizational culture and military doctrine.
See Wilson 1989, especially 32.
See Kuhn 1970; and Khong 1992.
Levitt and March 1988, 322.

240

International Law and International Relations

knowledge is required for decisions. The more complex the issue, the less
effective senior authorities will be in objecting to or intervening in operations and the more organizational preferences will be felt. The time frame
for decision making can also affect bureaucratic effect. When decisionmaking cycles are short, so is time for adjusting prearranged plans.
These traits all suggest that military organizations will have a high
salience in choices on the use of force in war. Militaries are key players
in such situations because they generally have monopoly control over expertise in the use of force, military operations are complex and not easily
understood by nonspecialists, and the time periods for altering prearranged plans are limited. Civilians may have authority to make final
choices, but often contrary to their wishes and efforts, military propensity
can prevail in the midst of war due to the organizational salience of the
armed forces.
In sum, organizational culture is important because it shapes organizational identity, priorities, perception, and capabilities in ways unexpected by noncultural approaches. Those means compatible with the
dominant war-fighting culture will be developed and advocated by the
military; those that are not will suffer benign neglect. Even as the cultural
tendencies of militaries can remain fairly consistent, their heightened
organizational salience in war may lead to change in national policy on
the use of force. With regard to World War II, this view predicts that,
ceteris paribus, a state will favor adherence to norms proscribing a
particular form of combat if that form is antithetical to the war-fighting
culture of its military bureaucracy. States will prefer violations regarding
means that are compatible with organizational cultures. ***

norms and organizational culture in world war ii
To assess the relative explanatory power of the two approaches, I rely on
two methods. The first is a macrocorrelation of each approach’s ability to
predict outcomes across a number of cases. The second is an in-depth analysis of some of the history to illustrate the validity of the causal mechanisms.
The cases I examine relate to submarines, strategic bombing, and CW
in World War II. These are a good focus because they were the three
main types of combat that states had considered for limitation in the
interwar period. These three also make sense for assessing the propositions because they allow for variation in both the ‘‘independent’’ (norms
and culture) and the ‘‘dependent’’ (state preferences on the use of force)
variables, and they ‘‘control’’ other factors, such as the personalities,

Which Norms Matter?

241

the causes of conflict, the stakes at risk, and the general international
setting. Within the three categories, I investigate a total of eight cases. In
submarine warfare, I examine Britain, Germany, and the United States.
In strategic bombing, I focus on Britain and Germany. And in CW, the
analysis considers Britain, Germany, and the Soviet Union. I selected
countries because they were either the central possessors or potential
users of a particular means of warfare or because their behavior was
anomalous. For example, why did the Soviet Union not use CW in June
1941 when it was facing a devastating German invasion and imminent
defeat, had the weapons in its inventory, and had adopted a ‘‘scorched
earth’’ strategy? I excluded cases that might at first glance seem relevant
because they did not allow a comparable assessment of the norms and
culture propositions or because I could not verify that norms or culture
were not epiphenomenal to strategic realist concerns (discussed below).
For example, I excluded both U.S. strategic bombing (including the
dropping of the atom bomb) and CW use against Japan because Japan
could not retaliate against the United States with comparable means,
thus removing a key balance-of-forces condition that is present in the
other cases. While the list of cases examined does not comprise the entire
universe of possible cases, it is a representative one.
Macrocorrelation
A first way to assess the two alternative propositions is through a small-n
comparison of their predictions versus the outcomes across the cases. This
requires specification of the content of their predictions.
Measuring Norms
A norm account requires a sense of the relative robustness, based on the
specificity, durability, and concordance, of the prohibitions in the three
types of warfare. I offer no precise formula on how to aggregate the three
into an overall measure of robustness. Like all coding, this exercise is
partly interpretive, but it improves on many studies that offer no way to
evaluate norm strength at all or do so tautologically. Any evaluation of
robustness must measure it independently from the norm’s effects. Here,
the evidence for robustness comes from the period prior to 1939 and
describes primarily international-level phenomena. In contrast, the dependent variable (discussed below) is national preferences on adherence to
norms limiting the use of force after 1939. The prohibitions on submarine
warfare, strategic bombing, and CW each deserve brief description.

242

International Law and International Relations

In submarine warfare, it was not so much the weapon itself that was
stigmatized but its employment against civilian ships and personnel. What
was considered illegitimate was the destruction of merchant and passenger ships without attention to the safety of those on board – a practice that
came to be known as unrestricted submarine warfare.17
The norm against such unrestricted warfare is notable as relatively
robust in its durability, specificity, and concordance. The rules regulating submarine warfare stood out as relatively durable. Modern international limitations on attacks at sea date back at least to the Hague
Peace Conference of 1899. When Germany used unrestricted submarine
warfare extensively in World War I, it provoked a significant adverse
reaction culminating in the U.S. entrance into the conflict. Over the course
of the interwar years, prohibitions on submarines were repeatedly discussed in the context of international conferences and generally approved.
Most important, even as other international agreements crumbled in
the wake of rising international tension in the late 1930s, countries took
pains to reaffirm the illegality of underwater boat attacks on merchant
ships. They gathered in 1936 to approve the London Protocol on Submarine Warfare, while the broader London Naval Conference dissolved
in disagreement. Significantly, when the London Protocol was anonymously violated (by Italy) in 1937 during the Spanish civil war, countries
took action to punish any further violations, and the unrestricted attacks
stopped.18
Despite the fact that prominent historians have called the rules explicit
and legally binding, the protocol did present some problems in specificity.19 For example, the definition of what constituted a ‘‘merchant ship’’
was not entirely clear. Whether the arming of a vessel, even if for defensive purposes, made it an actual combatant was hotly disputed, Britain
was intent on retaining the right to arm its merchants and denied that
such armaments altered their civilian status.20 Nonetheless, even defensive armaments comprised a threat to submarines that were highly vulnerable on the surface while conducting the required search and seizure
procedures. The rules about providing for the safety of passengers and
17

18
19

20

For solid, concise, secondary accounts of the development of the submarine rules, see
Burns 1971; and Manson 1993.
See Toynbee 1938, 339–49; and Frank 1990.
See Samuel F. Bemis, ‘‘Submarine Warfare in the Strategy of American Defense and
Diplomacy, 1915–1945,’’ Study prepared for the U.S. Navy, 15 December 1961, Yale
University Library, Box 1603A, 15–16; and Morison 1951, 8.
Burns 1971, 58.

Which Norms Matter?

243

crews when sinking merchant vessels were likewise vague. Because underwater boats had small crews, they could often not afford to leave men
to sail the ship into port. Furthermore, they could not generally take the
noncombatant’s crew and passengers aboard because of the lack of space.
These people could be put in their emergency boats, but countries differed
on whether this was safe.
Finally, in terms of concordance, the regime received widespread
support. Prior to the war, the submarine rules had been accepted and
reaffirmed by a total of forty-eight states. Among them were Britain,
Germany, Japan, the Soviet Union, and the United States, all central
combatants during World War II. Overall, in terms of durability, specificity, and concordance, the submarine rules represented the most robust
institution of the three examined in this study.
The second norm constrained strategic bombing. Statesmen made
considerable efforts during the interwar years to reduce the quantity of
military aircraft and/or to find ways to regulate conflict by agreeing on
rules and restrictions. The main distinction they hoped to enforce was between bombing civilians and combatants. Persons participating directly
in the war effort were generally seen as legitimate targets of air power.
All others were to be considered illegitimate victims, on whom only the
inhumane and criminal would drop bombs.21
Concordance was low, however. There was little consensus among
nations on the rules. No firm agreement on aerial bombing was apparent in the discourse of international negotiations or accepted in
treaty language during the interwar years. At the start of World War II,
Britain and Germany did agree verbally to an appeal for restraint by
U.S. President Roosevelt, but this last-minute accord raised, at a minimum, questions of commitment.22
Because concordance was low, resulting in the absence of a finalized
agreement, specificity is difficult to evaluate. Generally, however, the
participants seemed to use the 1923 Hague Commission of Jurists’
product as a benchmark. Even though they were the most detailed of
the interwar years, these rules, too, were troubled by disagreement.
The main point of contention was what exactly constituted a military
objective. Were civilian factories producing parts for airplanes a legitimate target? Was it acceptable to bomb troop barracks surrounded by
hospitals and schools? Each state seemed to have a different way of
21
22

Spaight 1947, 43.
On this agreement, see ibid. 259–60.

244

International Law and International Relations

differentiating civilian from combatant, safe zone from battle area,
legitimate from illegitimate bombing.23 In the absence of clear rules, we
can only conclude that specificity was indeed low.
Norms on strategic bombing were also as fragile as any studied here.24
Linked to the prohibition against attacking undefended cities was an
agreement at the 1899 Hague conference that dropping weapons from
balloons or ‘‘other new weapons of a similar nature’’ was not allowable.
Additionally, while the representatives did not elect to include specific
language related to the airplane at the 1907 Hague conference, they did
reaffirm the prohibition against attacking undefended cities and dwellings.25 Nonetheless, in World War I some states did bomb cities. By the
beginning of World War II, Franklin Roosevelt’s last-minute appeal was
the only vestige of states’ explicit external commitment to restrict
bombing. To the extent that the 1923 Hague rules comprised a de facto
prohibition, they were not respected very well in the conflicts in China
and Spain during the 1930s. Overall, the norms of air warfare were less
developed than those relating to either submarine warfare or CW.
The third major target of diplomatic efforts to limit the use of force
in this period was CW. While prohibitions against the use of poison
agents had existed for centuries, the interwar norm on gas use showed
mixed durability. On the one hand, constraints on chemical use had been
a part of international law from the turn of the century. On the other,
states had violated the constraints egregiously during World War I.
Limitations on the use or manufacture of gas were discussed in a number
of conferences during the 1920s and 1930s. The issue of limits on CW
was first broached at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 that prohibited
Germany from using, manufacturing, or importing poisonous gases or the
raw materials and equipment to produce them. CW received considerable
attention at the 1921–22 Washington Conference on the Limitation of
Armaments, but a provision that prohibited the use of poison gases in war
was proposed but never ratified. The 1925 Geneva Conference for the
Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in
Implements of War provided another forum in which CW was discussed.
After proposals to prohibit the export of poisonous gases and related
materials were rejected, diplomats decided to act again on the CW

23
24
25

See Moore 1924, 194–202; and Spaight 1947, 43–47.
Parks 1992 argues that the rules were largely illegitimate.
On the development of bombing prohibitions, see Parks 1992; Royse 1928; and De
Saussure 1971.

Which Norms Matter?

245

provisions of the Washington treaty.26 This agreement became known as
the Geneva Protocol. It was the only agreement on CW concluded during
the interwar period and had a somewhat stormy record of adherence in
those years. For example, Italy violated the agreement in 1935 in its war
with Ethiopia. The League of Nations responded weakly with limited
economic sanctions that were not enforced and were largely ineffectual.27
In 1938, when Japan used chemical weapons in China, the League of
Nations and most other polities simply ignored the event.28
Concordance with the norm was moderate. The problem was that
neither Japan nor the United States publicly ratified the 1925 protocol
before the start of war in 1939. Furthermore, Britain and France agreed
to respect the norm only in conflicts with other parties that had ratified
the agreement and whose allies also adhered to the agreement. This provision might have had significant ramifications in World War II. For example, since Japan engaged in CW in China and was an ally of Germany,
Britain’s pledge of restraint would no longer have been guaranteed.
The Geneva Protocol was simple and fairly precise, however. Signatory
nations would not use CW first if the other side was a signatory and also
showed restraint. It allowed only a few minor gray areas. For example,
high explosives released small amounts of chemicals; was this a violation? The use of nonlethal gas (such as tear gas) was another unresolved
area. Some countries, such as the United States, wanted the freedom to
employ nonlethal gases to control their own populaces.29 Overall, the
anti-CW norm was more robust than that attached to strategic bombing but less than that limiting submarine warfare. Table 11.1 summarizes
these relationships along with their predicted effects.
Measuring Organizational Cultures
Organizational culture is gauged according to the ideas and beliefs about
how to wage war that characterized a particular military bureaucracy.
Specifically, the issue of interest is whether the favored way of war
incorporated the specific means prohibited (violation oriented) or designated it either as nonorganic or as peripheral (adherence oriented). A
measure of each culture is developed by reviewing available internal correspondence, planning documents, regulations, exercises, and memoirs

26
27
28
29

For studies of the development of the prohibition, see Moon 1993; and Price forthcoming.
See Fair 1985, 45; SIPRI 1971b, 180.
SIPRI 1971b, 189–90.
Ibid., 102–4.

246

International Law and International Relations
table 11.1. Assessing Norm Robustness
Submarine
warfare

Specificity
Durability
Concordance
Overall relative
assessment
Prediction

Chemical
warfare

Strategic
bombing

Medium
High
Very high
High

Very high
Low
Medium
Medium

Low
Low
Low
Low

Most likely
adherence

Mixed adherence/
violation

Most likely
violation

of individual members. These multiple sources provide a composite picture of the hierarchy of legitimate beliefs within an organization. This is
a holistic exercise that depends on the qualitative interpretation of the
specific content of each culture. While this makes a priori generalizations difficult, it does allow for the coding of a culture as violation or adherence oriented. Cultural explanations are often accused of being post hoc
and tautological: a certain cultural belief can always be found after the fact
that ‘‘explains’’ a given action. In this case, however, the sources I have
used to measure culture describe bureaucratic thinking and date from
the earlier interwar years, while the outcomes to be explained involve
national preferences during the later war. Thus the organizational culture
hypothesis can be falsified. For example, U.S. Navy culture was oriented
toward adhering to prohibitions on unrestricted submarine warfare
throughout the interwar period. Yet on the first day of war the United
States switched to favoring such warfare. This case tends to disconfirm the
organizational culture hypothesis.
Although it is not possible here to document the entire logic of each
military’s organizational culture and its relationship to the use of stigmatized force, the brief summaries below can give a snapshot of each
culture and which prediction – violation of or adherence to the respective
norm – follows from it.30
In submarine warfare, the German navy, unlike many, viewed the
submarine as a valued combat tool, and because the ethos of its underwater force was based on its World War I unrestricted trade offensive, its
plans, operations, and advice were biased in favor of violation. In contrast,
the British navy, long dominated by a belief in the supremacy of the
30

For a more detailed analysis of these cultures, see Legro 1995.

Which Norms Matter?

247

battleship, considered submarines a strictly ancillary means of combat.
Even when Britain had strategic incentives to turn to submarine raiding,
it did not. During the interwar period, the Royal Navy’s main expected adversary was Japan, a nation vulnerable to a submarine campaign,
yet the navy never considered an anticommerce submarine strategy.
British naval culture favored adherence to the rules. Finally, the U.S.
Navy, like the Royal Navy, was ‘‘battleship-bound’’ in its thinking during the interwar period. It gave little consideration to an unrestricted
commerce campaign against Japan, its main expected opponent, despite
Japan’s vulnerability to such a strategy. This cultural orientation predicts
U.S. adherence to the rules.
In contrast to the navy’s orientation in submarine warfare, the German
army’s culture led it to favor adherence to the CW norm. Army thought
highlighted the efficacy of the mobile offensive, and CW – perceived as
a static defensive weapon – was seen as ill-suited to the dominant mindset. The British military was also inclined toward adherence but for different reasons. The Royal Army was a tradition-governed antitechnology
force that was generally hostile to CW, particularly given its institutional experience in World War I. CW was more compatible with the
Royal Air Force’s strategic bombing thinking, but the army was in charge
of CW development. The air force developed its own biases toward firebombing and high explosives (even though gas was considered a complement, not a competitor, to those munitions). Finally, the Soviet Union’s
Red Army was dominated by a faith in the offensive, an orientation that
was encouraged by its civil war experience and ensuing debates about the
proper political-military orientation for the country. It subsequently paid
less attention to means such as CW, which was perceived as primarily
useful in defense. This orientation favored adherence to the CW rules.
In strategic bombing, Britain’s Royal Air Force developed around a
‘‘faith’’ in the effectiveness of strategic bombing, particularly against civilians and their morale. Personnel, plans, weapons acquisition, and intelligence all were affected by this ideology. This culture favored a violation
of the rules, even as geopolitical factors and popular concern cautioned
against such action. Although it toyed with strategic bombing, the German
air force moved away from such concepts as the war years approached.
The Luftwaffe, influenced by Germany’s continental tradition of warfare
and a variety of circumstantial factors, was more focused on contributing to the ground and sea campaigns than achieving victory by targeting
enemy morale in an unrestricted bombing offensive. This culture was
more inclined toward adherence to the rules on strategic bombing.

248

International Law and International Relations

Predictions Versus Outcomes
A macrocomparison of expected effects versus actual outcomes during
World War II yields a first look at the influence of norms and organizational culture. For this analysis, ‘‘outcome’’ refers to the preferences of
states, not their actions. We can thus distinguish between conscious
violation of a norm with those situations where states may have responded to the other side’s violation (an allowable action) of where they
crossed boundaries by accident. In practice, preferences and action
correspond closely. I measured preferences by reviewing the internal
discussions of the wartime leadership regarding its desired outcomes.
Such decision-making bodies were often small groups that debated and
reached a consensus on desired ends.
Table 11.2 summarizes the relative predictive fit of the norm and
organizational culture approaches. Predictions from an organizational
culture perspective matched the outcome significantly more consistently
than predictions from a norm perspective (7 versus 3.5 of 8). In those cases
where normative prohibitions are most robust, for instance, we should
expect adherence or at least the slowest shift toward the opposite preference. Where norms are thinly developed, a preference for violation
should be more likely. As Table 11.2 indicates, however, the relationship
between norm robustness and preferences on the use of force seems weak.
For example, in submarine warfare, where the institution of restraint
was most robust, nations first favored escalation. Yet in CW, where the
institution was less developed, nations preferred restraint throughout
the conflict.
Table 11.2 displays a relatively consistent link between military culture
and state preferences regarding the use of force. When culture favored
violation, prohibitions against use generally were disregarded. And
when culture was inclined toward adherence, states tended to prefer adherence to international norms. In both absolute and relative terms, organizational culture correlates strongly with the variation in adherence
to the limitations on the use of force.
Microassessment of Causal Mechanisms
A closer look at the details of World War II is a necessary complement to
the macrocomparison in three ways. First, it provides a better sense of
the content and use of analytical constructs such as norms and organizational culture. Second, as sophisticated methodologists are quick
to point out, correlation by itself does not tell us what caused the

Which Norms Matter?

249

table 11.2. A Macrocorrelation: Two Approaches and the Pattern
of Norm Adherence
Predictionsa
Norm

Organizational
culture

Outcome
(N ¼ 8)

Britain
Chemical warfare
Strategic bombing
Submarine warfare

Mixed (1/2)b
Violation (1)
Adherence (1)

Adherence (1)
Violation (1)
Adherence (1)

Adherence
Violation
Adherencec

Germany
Chemical warfare
Strategic bombing
Submarine warfare

Mixed 1/2
Violation (0)
Adherence (0)

Adherence (1)
Adherence (1)
Violation (1)

Adherence
Adherencec
Violation

Soviet Union
Chemical warfare

Mixed (1/2)

Adherence (1)

Adherence

United States
Submarine warfare

Adherence (0)

Adherence (0)

Violation

Correlational fit

3.5/8

7/8

Case

a

b

c

The match between prediction and outcome is in parentheses. It was scored as follows:
0 ¼ no match; 1 ¼ match; 1/2 ¼ half a match (see below).
The mixed pattern represents a middle position on the norm robustness continuum. It
predicts that chemical warfare would have shown a varying pattern of preferences for
mutual adherence and violation. Since this view also predicts a partial or varying
preference for restraint and is indeterminate as to the dominant preference, I have scored
it in favor of the norm proposition as half a match.
Though the state eventually violated the norm, it did so only after the other side’s first use,
as allowed by norms in all three categories, and thus was coded as adherence.

apparent association. Microanalysis allows for better checking of the
causal mechanisms posited by each approach.31 Finally, such analysis is
useful for checking to make sure that the presumed relationships are
not spurious owing to some other influence. One clear possibility is
political-military advantage. A ‘‘strategic realist’’ view would argue that
especially in war, states choose means according to their expected
contribution to strategic goals; states will prefer violating norms when
they expect to reap relative military or political benefits from doing so.
31

George and McKeown 1985.

250

International Law and International Relations

In those situations where violations further a state’s position, escalation is
probable. Likewise, when a relative loss or disadvantage will result
from escalation, adherence is more likely.32
My microassessment focuses on the *** British submarine warfare
case. [For space reasons a section of German submarine warfare is omitted.] Given space limitations, this case offers maximum analytical leverage. *** The norm was most robust in submarine warfare, so that norm
effects should be most significant in that area. Moreover, the British case
at least seems to offer a priori support for the influence of norms:
British preferences matched the predictions of the norm hypothesis. A
careful study of the decision-making process reveals, however, that
this relationship is problematic and that organizational culture was the
more influential cause.
* * *
British Submarine Warfare
Britain preferred restraint in this case, an outcome that the norms,
organizational culture, and strategic advantage propositions predict.
Examining the decision-making process in this case helps to sort out the
relative influence of the three because it increases the number of observations that are theoretically relevant and permits differentiation of causal
mechanisms.33 British calculations on the submarine rules occurred in
two key stages: before and after German escalation.
British preferences and actions before the German escalation can be
attributed to several causes. The robustness of the submarine norm and
Britain’s particularly energetic role in promoting it during the interwar
period indicate a strong preference for restraint. Strategic realism also
predicts restraint because Britain was dependent on trade and defended
by a large surface fleet; hence submarine use could only be harmful.
From an organizational culture vantage point, the expected effects were
the same: the navy orthodoxy saw very limited possibilities for employing the submarine, thus favoring norm adherence.
A second stage, one that allows us to sort out the three propositions,
came after Germany had violated the submarine rules in October 1939,
when Britain continued to adhere to restraint. A strategic view would
expect escalation at this point. Britain no longer had any reason to prefer
adherence to the norm because it no longer had to fear that its own
32
33

For a more developed discussion and assessment of this proposition, see Legro 1995.
George and McKeown 1985, 36.

Which Norms Matter?

251

use would induce the more costly German retaliation: Germany already
had transgressed the rules. More important, submarines could play an
immediate strategic role. Germany was using merchant ships to import
iron ore – a critical material for Nazi war industries – from both Sweden
and, in the winter, Norway.34 In October, some proposed that British
submarines should be used to intercept this trade. Because of icebound
Baltic ports in the winter, the iron ore was sent to Narvik and shipped
through Norwegian coastal waters and across the Skagerrak and
Kattegat, areas where unrestricted submarine warfare would be effective but where British surface ships were either vulnerable or would
violate Norwegian waters.
A norm perspective predicts expectations, thinking, desires, and
actions that reflect the prescriptions of the submarine rules or concerns
about the effects of transgressing them. According to this perspective,
after Germany had escalated, Britain should have done the same, since
the norm was one of quid pro quo restraint. If only to reinforce the norm,
Britain should have turned toward escalation, yet it did not.
Some evidence suggests norms were influential in Britain’s decisionmaking process, although again, they were not decisive. Specifically, a
view that recognizes both the impact of normative prohibitions and
strategic concerns captures at least one part of the process. In the early
fall of 1939, it became increasingly clear that Germany was violating the
rules of submarine warfare. The British Foreign Office noted that, as of
5 October, nine of thirty-one reported incidents related to the submarine rules were violations, amounting to a ‘‘formidable list of illegalities.’’
By the end of October, the navy had concluded Germany was making
illegal attacks.35 As Britain considered how to respond, several ideas
were forwarded, ranging from a looser interpretation of the London protocol to permitting unrestricted warfare in the Baltic.36 These proposals,
however, were rejected. Not only was the idea of unrestricted warfare
turned down but the Lords of the Admiralty would not approve

34

35

36

See U.K. PRO, ADM 199/892, Memorandum from First Lord, 19 September 1939; and
Roskill 1968, 156.
See U.K. PRO, ADM 1/10584, Memorandum from William Malkin, Foreign Office, 24
October 1939 and ADM 199/892, Minute by the Head of the Military Branch, October
1939.
See the following U.K. PRO documents: ADM 199/878, 008070/39, Minute by Deputy
Chief of the Naval Staff, 25 October 1939; ADM 199/892, Minute by Head of Military
Branch, October 1939; and ADM 199/892, Minute by Director of Plans, 3 November
1939.

252

International Law and International Relations

even loosening Britain’s strict interpretation of the protocol’s search and
seizure rules. Britain was concerned that the goodwill it was attempting
to build among neutral countries would be dissipated should submarines
be employed. The Lords sensibly feared that some accident would result
that would alienate important countries such as Norway and Sweden.37
Britain wanted to avoid antagonizing neutral countries especially with
regard to one issue, the control of German exports. Britain had already
instituted a ‘‘contraband’’ system to limit Third Reich imports and now
wanted to do the same to Germany’s outgoing trade. To accomplish this,
however, Britain would need the support of the neutral countries and
therefore had to keep their interests in mind. The British plan was to forgo
tit-for-tat replies to Germany’s breaches of the London Protocol and
instead allow the illegalities to accumulate; it would then respond by
controlling German exports.38
While these incidents indicate the influence of both the prohibitions
and the strategic concerns, events that followed cast doubt on whether
they were at the heart of British restraint. In December 1939, Britain did
implement export controls but in response to Germany’s ‘‘illegal’’ mining
activity, not its submarine violations. Furthermore, while Britain put
plans (Operation Wilfred) into motion in early April 1940 that violated
Norwegian waters with underwater mines, it maintained its restraints
on submarines.39 Thus even though Germany conducted unrestricted
warfare and neutral country reaction became less of a concern, Britain
did not turn to escalation. Although the rules allowed Britain to escalate
under the circumstances, restraint obtained for five months beyond
German escalation while iron ore shipments continued and even during
the first days of the Nazi invasion of Norway in April 1940. Why?
Organizational culture offers an answer to this curious restraint. The
British navy was dominated by a battleship creed that considered the big
surface ship as the pivotal element in the large clashes of fleets that were
expected to decide the war at sea. Navy leadership saw the submarine
as a strictly ancillary tool. It gave little attention to and sometimes even
disparaged commerce warfare, especially the unrestricted type. Despite
the devastating success of German submarines in World War I, the Royal
37

38

39

See U.K. PRO, ADM 199/892, Minute by Head of Military Branch, and ADM 199/892,
Minute by Director of Plans, the latter of which was approved by the First Lord, First Sea
Lord, Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff.
See U.K. PRO, ADM 199/878, Minute by Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff, and ADM
199/892, Minute by Head of Military Branch.
Roskill 1954, 102 and 156–58.

Which Norms Matter?

253

Navy’s postwar assessment committee reaffirmed that the ‘‘battleship
retains her old predominant position.’’40 As one captain noted in his diary,
the committee ‘‘had merely made statements, assertions: had not examined the war to find out what the influence of the big ship was, or whether
she was still in the position she used to be fing. The thing i.e. the future
of the battleship must be approached in a far more scientific manner.’’41
The navy’s exercises in the interwar years, which were meant to be
objective measures of competence, gave submarines little chance to prove
their worth. Since the dominant creed assumed that submarines were
relatively ineffective, the navy structured its exercises accordingly and
rejected results that suggested otherwise. At the end of a 1939 exercise,
a submarine officer accurately reported to a hall of one thousand sailors
that torpedoes had hit 22 percent of their targets. Instead of the normal
questions, Admiral Forbes, the commander of the Home Fleet, stood up,
declared that the officer was clearly wrong and that 3 percent was the
correct figure, and the session ended.42 The navy’s battleship cult also affected its evaluation of the threat of enemy submarines. Ignoring readily
available evidence, many believed that the danger from German Uboats had been mastered: Britain did not conduct a single exercise in protection of a slow convoy against the submarine between 1919 and 1939.43
In short, it was the battleship orthodoxy that drove decisions on
whether to violate the norm on submarine warfare. The deputy chief of
the naval staff commented in October 1939 that ‘‘if it could be shown
that it was essential for us to take full advantage of the latitude allowed by
the Submarine Protocol in order to achieve some war aim, then I would
say that we should have to do so but, at the present moment, I do not think
this is the case.’’44 In fact, had the submarine regulations been loosened,
the underwater boats could have been used effectively for considerable
strategic advantage both off the coast of Norway and in the sea channel between Germany and Sweden and Norway.45 Even when the gray uniforms
40

41

42

43

44

45

See U.K. PRO, ADM 1/8586, ‘‘Final Report of the Post-War Questions Committee,’’ 27
March 1920, as cited in Roskill 1968, 115, Also see Terraine 1989, 117–18.
Diary entry of Captain (later Sir Admiral) Herbert Richmond for 10 November 1919, as
cited in Roskill 1968, 115–16.
See Simpson 1972, 48–49, 57–58, and 74–76; Hezlet 1967, 119; Mars 1971, 33; and
Roskill 1976, 230 and 430–31.
See Henry 1976, 381–82; Roskill 1976, 336–37 and 477; and Roskill 1954, 45,355,
and 536.
U.K. PRO, ADM 199/878, Minute 08070/39 by Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff, 25
October 1939.
See Roskill 1954, 334–35; King 1958, 55–56; and Hezlet 1967, 125 and 138–40.

254

International Law and International Relations

of the Wehrmacht were spotted on merchant ships, Britain allowed
German shipping to continue in the Kattegat during the early stages of
the Reich’s invasion of Norway in April 1940. As it had twenty submarines in the waters through which the invasion fleet sailed, Britain’s restraint in this instance has been called a significant ‘‘missed opportunity.’’46
How Norms Matter
To argue that norms do not account as well as organizational culture
for the differential use of prohibited warfare in World War II is not to say
such prohibitions were meaningless. The record clearly suggests that
the norms did indeed ‘‘matter’’ in at least one fundamental sense and
a number of less consequential ways related to the way that states
thought, communicated, and acted with regard to the use of force.
Constituting Heinous Warfare
The most fundamental effect of norms was to define which means of
warfare would even be considered for restraint.47 Rather than inventory
their armories and war plans in search of finding heinous forms of
fighting, countries considered for restraint those forms that already were
stigmatized by extant norms. This stigmatization was not a simple
product of the technological inhumanity of a particular form of combat.
States hardly blinked over the use of equally inhumane forms of warfare
such as high-explosive artillery shells or flamethrowers. And was it really
less moral to bomb London than to besiege Leningrad? Yet bombing
was stigmatized while besieging a defended city was not. No objective
measure of inhumanity set submarines, strategic bombing, and chemical
weapons apart. Only recognized norms dictated the boundaries of
acceptable use. At times, these took the form of a moral consideration:
whether it was ‘‘right’’ to use such a weapon. For example, when Britain
considered the use of CW, one assistant chief of the army general staff
argued that ‘‘such a departure from our principles and traditions would
have the most deplorable effects not only on our own people but even on
the fighting services. Some of us would begin to wonder whether it really
mattered which side won.’’48 More often, the special attention given to
these three prohibitions had to do with the material consequences of
46
47
48

Simpson 1972, 89.
This thesis is developed in greater depth in Price forthcoming.
U.K. PRO, WO 193/732, Minute from Assistant Chief of the Imperial General Staff (C)
to Chief of the Imperial General Staff, 16 June 1940.

Which Norms Matter?

255

violations as seen above. In either case, the effect of the international
norms suggests they may be a critical facilitating force in the limitation
of otherwise taken-for-granted behavior. To find whether this is in fact
the case would entail a broader investigation that would include cases
where mutual restraint in using militarily significant weapons obtained
but where no legacy of international norms existed. That such cases do
not readily come to mind suggests the relevance of norms.
Restricting Preparations
In some cases, norms also affected the way states prepared for war.
For example, popular anti-CW sentiment in Britain during the 1920s
and 1930s combined with Britain’s acceptance of the Geneva Protocol
seemed to add slightly to constraints on developing gas warfare. Terms
were changed to avoid any reference to offensive CW; training materials
were not written or distributed and exercises not conducted to avoid a
perception that Britain was preparing for a chemical war. Even the open
development of civil defense measures against gas was deferred in 1929
as being ill-timed in light of Britain’s ratification that year of the Geneva
Protocol.49 The Foreign Office adamantly opposed proposals to use gas
on India’s northwest frontier against Afghan tribesmen in the mid-1920s.
It found the turnaround in policy to be too quick. Austen Chamberlain,
the Foreign Secretary, argued that since Britain had vilified Germany for
gas use in World War I, it had to wait until its ‘‘charges against Germany
were less present in the minds of the public’’ before advocating gas use.50
Yet one must be careful not to overstate the influence of the antigas
norm. Although Britain’s offensive gas program was pushed underground,
it was not stopped. After the Geneva Protocol was signed, the work
previously done in the Offensive Munitions Department was simply
conducted under the heading of ‘‘chemical weapons against which defense is required.’’ A variety of research and weapons development for
offensive warfare evolved under the guise of this semantic cover.51 By the
late 1930s, any constraining impact that public opinion had exerted
49

50

51

See U.K. PRO, WO 188/390, ‘‘Lecture to Staff College, Camberly,’’ 10 April 1931, and
WO 188/446, ‘‘Preparation of Training Manuals on Chemical Warfare,’’ 30 September
1930; Harris and Paxman 1982, 46–47; SIPRI 1971a, 269 and 300; Haber 1986, 300;
and Spiers 1986, 47–49.
The quotation is from U.K. PRO, CAB 2/4, Minute of 215 and 217 Meetings of the
Committee on Imperial Defense, 22 July and 11 November 1926, as cited in Spiers
1986, 48.
Harris and Paxman 1982, 42 and 47.

256

International Law and International Relations

on CW preparations dissipated, as the threat of war with Germany
rose.52
Rules also inhibited wartime preparations in the United States. Although U.S. Navy culture had ignored commerce warfare in the interwar
years, once war with Japan seemed imminent some navy officials began to
acknowledge the possible benefits of using submarines against shipping.
When the naval leadership considered the matter, however, it advised
against changing the rules because doing so would be ‘‘contrary to international law and U.S. policy’’ and instead recommended maintaining a traditional posture until circumstances rendered modification advisable.53
The Japanese Pearl Harbor attack soon provided such circumstances.
Influencing Third-Party Reactions
Most apparent, international principles affected the expectations of
states regarding the reactions of other parties. The rules of warfare set
guidelines for what was considered acceptable behavior. States believed
that violating such guidelines could cost them the support of other
countries or even their own populace. Germany, as mentioned above,
fretted that its unrestricted submarine warfare would antagonize Britain
or the United States at a time when it wanted accommodation with the
former and nonintervention from the latter. Likewise, Britain pondered
how its unrestricted bombing or use of chemical weapons would affect the
support it desperately needed from the United States.
However, as seen in the case of German submarine warfare, these expected costs led states to alter the manner of policy implementation but
not necessarily the direction of decisions. So Britain, when worried that
its unrestricted campaign would alienate neutral countries, devised
schemes to blame escalation on the enemy in order to mitigate political
damage while going ahead with the bombing.54
Gaining Advantage
Norms also figured in state calculations of gaining advantage over the
enemy. Britain concluded that its own restraint, in the face of German
transgressions, would bring it favor with third parties. It planned to
52
53

54

Harris 1980, 60–61.
See U.S. National Archives, RG80, General Board Study No. 425, Amendment of Rules
for Maritime Commerce, Box 133, Department of the Navy, 15 May 1941; and Samuel F.
Bemis study, Yale University Library, Box 1603 A.
Terraine 1985, 143.

Which Norms Matter?

257

accumulate this ‘‘normative capital’’ and then cash it in at a later point.
For example, in the summer of 1939 the commander of the submarine
force, Rear Admiral B. C. Watson, wanted to announce danger zones
around British overseas possessions where submarines could defend
against invasion by attacking convoys without restrictions. The admiralty denied the proposal. It feared that if Britain initiated action, it
could not then blame the Germans for violating restrictions on submarine attacks or respond with ‘‘other measures besides a strict titfor-tat’’ that would be even more advantageous.55 As discussed above,
Britain’s plan to control German exports was also typical of this
thinking.
Signaling Intentions
Norms proved influential in terms of signaling intentions. In this sense
they help to define a critical dimension of the concept ‘‘threat’’ that has
played so large a role in the international relations literature.56 Violating
prohibitions was an indicator of the nature of one’s ambitions. Germany,
for example, sought accommodation with Britain after its invasion of
Poland in the fall of 1939. Even though it believed that its use of unrestricted submarine warfare was to its military advantage, Germany
favored restraint because it acknowledged that violating the submarine
rules would indicate to Britain that it aimed for total war; accommodation would then be impossible. Had these norms not developed
during the interwar period, the stigma of violation would not have been
so great. Norms worked in the same manner in the summer of 1940,
Then, Germany refrained from bombing British cities immediately after
defeating France. One reason for this restraint was Hitler’s interest in
striking a deal with Britain; unrestricted bombing would have scuttled
such a possibility. Here again the norm was important as a recognized
threshold of violence with social significance not applicable to conventional forms of combat.
[Original article includes section addressing possible objections to how I
measure norms, the role of strategic pressures, and the impact of national
culture and regime type.]
* * *
55

56

See U.K. PRO, ADM 1/10360, Rear Admiral (Submarines) to Secretary of the Admiralty,
‘‘Remarks on the Use of Submarines in Defence of Territory,’’ 3 August 1939, and ADM
1/10360, Minute 07295/39 by Head of the Military Branch, 21 August 1939.
For example, see Walt 1987, 25–26.

258

International Law and International Relations

conclusion
The contemporary surge in research on international norms inevitably
draws our attention to the past – particularly the interwar years.
Traditionally the two decades leading to World War II have comprised a
paradigmatic case showing that international norms are ineffective in
critical situations and that practical efforts based on norm effectiveness
are utopian. To be sure, neither the Kellogg-Briand Pact nor the League
of Nations effectively prohibited war. But even in this difficult period
for international institutions, not all prohibitions were ineffectual. Oddly
enough, in a total war, states struggling for survival altered or transcended
the expected use of particular forms of military power, in part because
of intentionally constructed international prohibitions on those types of
warfare.
Yet by considering the question, which norms matter? the drawbacks
of focusing exclusively on international norms are also apparent. In
World War II, the robustness of such norms did not directly relate to their
impact on the thinking and actions of actors or to systemic outcomes. But
contrary to the realist answer, neither relative capabilities nor the
situations of states was the primary catalyst. Instead, it was the organizational cultures of militaries that more significantly structured how
states understood their situations, what types of capabilities they saw
as important, and, ultimately, how desirable it was to violate the norm
or maintain mutual restraint. Furthermore, these cultures had a marked
autonomous effect relative to both norms and to the balance of power –
that is, the way militaries and nations thought about fighting was not
reducible either to international norms or to strategic opportunities.
Of course, the response to the prohibitions during World War II
was not a monocausal organizational culture story. As seen in the cases
above, concerns about international prescriptions and strategic advantage both had roles to play. Although I have assessed these variables
as competing hypotheses here, a synthetic model might, for example, develop an explanation of norm influence that takes into account both
the robustness of international prescriptions and the impact of nationallevel social understandings such as political or organizational culture.
* * *

12
The Territorial Integrity Norm: International
Boundaries and the Use of Force
Mark W. Zacher

* * *
In the late twentieth century many international relations scholars and
observers have commented on the declining importance of interstate territorial boundaries for a variety of national and transnational activities.1
Concurrently, something very significant has been happening in international relations that raises questions concerning judgments of the decreasing importance of boundaries: the growing respect for the proscription
that force should not be used to alter interstate boundaries – what is referred to here as the territorial integrity norm.2 The development of a
norm concerning respect for states’ territoriality is particularly important
because scholars have established that territorial disputes have been the
major cause of enduring interstate rivalries, the frequency of war, and the
intensity of war.3 After reviewing studies on interstate wars, John Vasquez
wrote that ‘‘Of all the issues over which wars could logically be fought,
territorial issues seem to be the ones most often associated with wars. Few
interstate wars are fought without any territorial issue being involved in
one way or another.’’4

1

2

3

4

See Ohmae 1990 and 1995; Rosecrance 1986 and 1996; Ruggie 1993; Rosenau 1990;
Elkins 1994; and Hirst and Thompson 1996.
A norm is generally defined as ‘‘a standard of appropriate behavior for actors of a given
identity’’ (Finnemore and Sikkink 1999, 251) and an international regulatory norm is
strong when it is respected and viewed as legally binding by the great majority of states.
See Holsti 1991; Goertz and Diehl 1992; Vasquez 1993, 123–52; Huth 1996; Hensel
1999; and Vasquez and Henehan 2001.
Vasquez 1993, 151.

259

260

International Law and International Relations

In this article I trace the dramatic change in attitudes and practices
of states in the Westphalian international order concerning the use of
force to alter interstate boundaries. *** In the first section I briefly outline
the attitudes and practices of states regarding territorial boundaries from
the seventeenth century until World War II. In the second section I focus
on the remarkable changes in beliefs and practices from World War II
until the present. In the third section I explore the roots of the territorial
integrity norm. States’ motivations for accepting the territorial integrity
norm have been both instrumental and ideational, and the importance
of different motivations has varied among groups of states. ***

international boundaries from the seventeenth
to the early twentieth century
Political life has not always disclosed a clearly defined system of international boundaries. The medieval world did not have international
boundaries as we understand them today;5 authority over territorial
spaces was overlapping and shifting. The political change from the
medieval to the modern world involved the construction of the delimited
territorial state with exclusive authority over its domain. Even at that,
precisely surveyed national borders only came into clear view in the
eighteenth century.6 In the words of Hedley Bull, the practice of establishing international boundaries emerged in the eighteenth century as
‘‘a basic rule of co-existence.’’7
The birth of the modern interstate system is often dated at the 1648
Peace of Westphalia, although key features of the system emerged gradually and fluctuated in strength before and after 1648. Initially, the legitimacy of interstate borders was defined in dynastic terms: state territory
was the exclusive property of ruling families, and they had an absolute
right to rule their territories. But this international order did not reflect
any absolute right to particular territory that could legitimately change
hands by inheritance, marriage, war, compensation, and purchase.8
In these early centuries of the Westphalian order territory was the main
factor that determined the security and wealth of states, and thus the
protection and acquisition of territory were prime motivations of foreign policy. Most wars, in fact, concerned the acquisition of territory,
5
6
7
8

Clark 1961, chap. 10.
Clark 1972, 144.
Bull 1977, 34–37.
Holsti 1991.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

261

and most of these wars led to exchanges of territory; this practice
continued until the middle of the twentieth century (see Table 12.1).
These practices were reflected in the legal norm concerning the legitimacy
of conquest. To quote the eminent international legal scholar Lassa
Oppenheim writing in 1905, ‘‘As long as a Law of Nations has been in
existence, the states as well as the vast majority of writers have recognized subjugation as a mode of acquiring territory.’’9
In the early centuries of the Westphalian system the populations of the
early modern states were often culturally diverse and politically disorganized. Many people were not collectively identified by state borders that
moved back and forth without much regard for them.10 The practice of
drawing boundaries in disregard of the people living in the territories was
extended from Europe to the rest of the world during the age of Western
colonialism from the sixteenth through the nineteenth centuries. This was
often carried out with little attention to the cultural and ethnic character
of the indigenous peoples of the non-European world. Yet it was the
borders that were initially drawn and imposed by Western imperialists
that later became the acceptable reference for articulating anticolonial
demands for self-determination and independent statehood.11
The nineteenth century was, of course, the age of nationalism, which
was spurred by the French Revolution and Napoleon’s support for popular sovereignty and national self-determination. These intellectual currents
began to alter peoples’ views concerning the legitimacy of territorial
conquests. ‘‘From the middle of the nineteenth century the current of
opinion, influenced by the growing belief in national self-determination,
was moving against the legitimacy of annexation outside the colonial
sphere, when effected without the consent of the inhabitants.’’12 Sharon
Korman referred to this change in attitudes as the beginning of an
‘‘important change in the moral climate of international relations.’’13 This
moral climate, with its clear democratic thrust, however, had conflicting
implications for the stability of boundaries. On the one hand, nationalism
supported the precept that a territory belonged to a national grouping and
it was wrong to take the land from a nation. On the other hand, nationalism
9

10
11
12
13

Quoted in Korman 1996, 7. Juxtapose this with the statement of Professor Lauterpacht
in the 1955 edition of Oppenheim’s International Law in Korman 1996, 179.
Clark 1972, 143.
See Jackson and Rosberg 1982; and Korman 1996, 41–66.
Korman 1996, 93.
Ibid., 39 (italics added). Malcolm Anderson has spoken of ‘‘the sacralization of homelands’’ as a result of the growth of nationalism. Anderson 1996, 3.

262

International Law and International Relations
table 12.1. Interstate Territorial Wars, 1648–2000
a. Wars by historical era

Period
1648–1712
1713–1814
1815–1917
1918–1945
1946–2000

Territorial
conflicts

Conflicts
resulting in
redistribution
of territory

Conflicts
in which
territory was
redistributed

Territorial
redistributions
per year

19
30
25
18
40

15
24
20
16
12

79%
80%
80%
88%
30%

0.23
0.24
0.19
0.59
0.22

Territorial
conflicts

Conflicts
resulting in
redistribution
of territory

Conflicts
in which
territory was
redistributed

Territorial
redistributions
per year

14
16
12
13
14
26
37

11
14
8
11
10
23
10

79%
88%
67%
85%
71%
89%
27%

0.22
0.28
0.16
0.22
0.20
0.46
0.20

b. Wars by half century

Period
1651–1700
1701–1750
1751–1800
1801–1850
1851–1900
1901–1950
1951–2000

Sources: Data used to identify territorial wars between 1648 and 1945 is from Holsti 1991.
Holsti classifies wars according to twenty-two issues. Six of these are clearly concerned with
control over territory: territory, strategic territory, colonial competition, empire creation,
maintaining integrity of empire, and national unification. Additional information on these
conflicts was derived from a number of secondary sources, including Goertz and Diehl 1992;
Goldstein 1992; McKay and Scott 1983; and Taylor 1954. Wars are classified by their
beginning date.
Information on territorial wars between 1946 and 2000 was also obtained from a large
number of secondary sources, including Bercovitch and Jackson 1997; Goertz and Diehl
1992; Kacowicz 1994; Huth 1996; and Wallensteen and Sollenberg 1998. Goertz and Diehl
focus on territorial conflicts where there were exchanges of territory; Kacowicz examines
cases of peaceful territorial change; and Huth includes territorial disputes that involved
and did not involve international violence. The Correlates of War list of conflicts was also
consulted. It includes territorial wars with over one thousand deaths. Singer and Small 1982.
There were five conflicts between 1946 and 2000 that led to minor border alterations and
are not included under ‘‘Conflicts resulting in redistribution of territory.’’ For descriptions
of the territorial aggressions between 1946 and 2000, see Table 12.2.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

263

provided grounds for a national grouping in one state trying to secede to
form an independent state or to unite with its ethnic compatriots living in
other states. In fact, nationalism had a more disruptive than pacifying
effect on international relations in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, as was witnessed in the wars surrounding the unification of
the German and Italian peoples and in the division of the Hapsburg,
Hohenzollern, and Ottoman empires into numerous national states.14
Three interrelated territorial issues during and at the end of World
War I were whether the victorious states should be able to take territory from the defeated, whether states should commit themselves to
respect the territorial integrity of other states, and whether national selfdetermination should take precedence over respect for existing state
boundaries in shaping the territorial order. On the first issue, in the early
years of World War I the major states still supported the right of victorious states to realize territorial gains, and this was reflected in their
secret treaties concerning territorial exchanges at the end of the war.
This perspective was altered significantly following the United States’ entry
into the war, the Russian revolution in 1917, and popular pressure
against territorial annexation in some countries.15 In the 1919 Versailles
settlement the victorious states only obtained small territorial concessions
in Europe, although they realized some significant gains by dividing up
the colonies of the defeated powers. Still, these colonies were declared
League Mandates, and the new colonial powers were implicitly obligated
to prepare the colonial peoples for self-governance – especially in the
case of the former Turkish territories.16 ***
On the second issue, the obligation to uphold the territorial integrity
of all states, President Woodrow Wilson was the strongest protagonist.
His famous ‘‘Fourteenth Point’’ spoke of ‘‘specific covenants for the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike.’’17 Such a revolutionary
proposal took the form of Article 10 of the League of Nations Covenant,
whose approval really constituted the beginning of states’ formal support
for the territorial integrity norm. It read: ‘‘The members of the League undertake to respect and preserve as against external aggression the territorial
integrity and existing political independence of all Members of the League.’’
14
15
16

17

See Cobban 1969; and Mayall 1990.
Korman 1996, 132–36.
See Article 22 of the League Covenant; Claude 1964, 322–28; and Korman 1996,
141–42.
See Zimmern 1939, 199; Egerton 1978; and Knock 1992.

264

International Law and International Relations

On the third question of the weight that should be given to the right
of national self-determination in redrawing international boundaries,
there was clearly tension within democratic governments between protagonists of national self-determination and respect for existing boundaries; and the former generally lost. Even President Wilson, who was
viewed as the leader of the national self-determination cause, came out
fundamentally on the side of respect for territorial integrity. National
self-determination for ethnic nations was not mentioned in the covenant,
and at the Versailles conference self-determination for ethnic nations
was only applied to some of the territories of the defeated states in World
War I.18 Overall, recognition of the territorial boundaries of juridical
states gained significant support in post–World War I settlements.
Following the World War I peace settlements, the territorial integrity
norm was supported in several multilateral declarations and treaties. The
1928 General Treaty for the Renunciation of War (better known as the
Kellogg-Briand Pact) certainly included support for the prohibition
against territorial aggressions, although it did not explicitly focus on territorial aggrandizement.19 The norm was then directly supported by the
League’s backing for the Stimson Doctrine in 1931, which denied the
legitimacy of territorial changes obtained by force.20
* * *
At the end of World War II the Western Allied Powers exhibited very
strong support for the integrity of interstate boundaries. With one exception they did not request or obtain sovereignty over any territories
that belonged to the defeated powers, although they did obtain some
UN Trust Territories that were formerly colonies of Japan and Italy and
that they were obliged to bring to independence. The exception was the
right of the United States to maintain control over some of the Pacific
islands that formerly belonged to Japan.21 The same approach toward
territorial gains, however, was not true for the Soviet Union, which
continued to operate with a classical view of boundaries, namely, that
the victors in wars could claim territorial spoils. The Baltic states were
integrated into the Soviet Union by Stalin against the wishes of their
populations and without the recognition of major Western powers. The

18
19
20
21

Franck 1990, 154–62.
Korman 1996, 192–99.
Stimson and Bundy 1948, 227–60.
See Korman 1996, 176; and Claude 1964, 339–40.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

265

Soviet Union also absorbed parts of Poland, Germany, Finland, Rumania,
the southern half of Japan’s Sakhalin Island, and Japan’s Kurile Islands.
In addition, the territory of postwar Germany was realigned and reduced. These changes were clearly reminiscent of the outcomes of wars
in earlier centuries, but they were the last major diplomatic developments
in Europe that blatantly defied the consent principle in the determination
of international boundaries.22 Finally, despite most countries’ accession
to the territorial gains of the Soviet Union, all countries at the 1945
San Francisco conference acceded to the obligation to respect existing
boundaries in the UN Charter: ‘‘All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state.’’23

the evolution of the territorial integrity
norm since 1945
General Legal and Declaratory Developments
The UN Charter of 1945, as noted, affirmed states’ obligation not to
use force to alter states’ boundaries. This same respect for the borders
of juridical entities influenced the UN’s approach to de-colonization. The
colonial territory, which was often artificial in terms of delimiting ethnic
nations, became the frame of reference for *** responding to claims for
self-determination and political independence.24 The 1960 UN Declaration on Granting Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples made
clear that it was existing colonies, and not ethnic groups, that were eligible for independence. Concerning ‘‘dependent peoples,’’ it stated that
‘‘the integrity of their national territory shall be respected.’’ It then proclaimed that ‘‘any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of
the national unity or territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.’’25
In 1970 the UN General Assembly approved a comparable normative
22

23

24
25

Korman 1996, 161–78. The new German-Polish border subsequently acquired legitimacy. The need to recognize this border was made abundantly clear to Chancellor
Helmut Kohl by Germany’s Western allies in 1990 when he voiced a desire to relocate
the border; Fritsch-Bournazel 1992, 102–11.
Article 2 (4). On debates over whether the UN prohibition allows any exceptions, see
Korman 1996, 199–229.
Jackson 1993.
Declaration on Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, UNGA res.
1514, 1960.

266

International Law and International Relations

statement in the Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among States.26 There is
clearly no ambiguity as to whether these major UN declarations supported respect for the territorial integrity of juridical states and existing
colonies. To quote Michael Barnett and Martha Finnemore, ‘‘The UN
encouraged the acceptance of the norm of sovereignty-as-territorialintegrity through resolutions, monitoring devices, commissions, and one
famous peacekeeping episode in the Congo in the 1960s.’’27
Apart from reviewing UN normative statements, it is important to
look at developments relating to respect for international boundaries
in several regional organizations. The charters of the Arab League and
Organization of American States, which were approved in 1945 and
1948, respectively, contained provisions supportive of the territorial
integrity of member states, but the issue was not highlighted by the
founding member states.28 Several decades afterwards, however, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) adopted strong and well-publicized
stands in favor of the sanctity of existing state boundaries. The 1963
OAU Charter contains a strong article in support of territorial integrity (Article 3). *** In 1975 the CSCE reiterated the same principle in the
Helsinki Final Act: ‘‘Frontiers can [only] be changed, in accordance with
international law, by peaceful means and by agreement.’’ Separate bilateral treaties between West Germany and its major Communist neighbors (East Germany, Poland, and the Soviet Union) that preceded and
anticipated the Helsinki agreements committed the parties to ‘‘respect
without restriction the territorial integrity’’ of each state and ‘‘reaffirm[ed] the inviolability of existing boundaries.’’29 At the end of the
Cold War the 1990 Charter of Paris for a New Europe reiterated exactly
the same principle, as have all subsequent conferences concerning international boundaries, including the 1995 Dayton peace treaty that
settled the wars in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina.30***
One other development should be noted with regard to attitudes and
practices within Europe and the Western community more generally. In
26

27
28
29
30

Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among States, UNGA res. 2625, 1970.
Barnett and Finnemore 1999, 713 (italics in original).
Zacher 1979, 189, 165.
Maresca 1985, 86–87.
See Ullman 1996; and Holbrooke 1998. The Dayton Agreement can be found at (http://
www1.umn.edu/humanrts/icty/dayton). See particularly Articles 1 and 10.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

267

the 1990s both the European Union (EU) and NATO proclaimed that
all new members must have accords with contiguous states as to their
borders. This has necessitated that the East European countries aspiring
to membership sign boundary treaties with their neighboring states –
sometimes at the cost of sacrificing long-held dreams of absorbing parts
of these neighboring countries.31 ***
The fifteen successor states of the Soviet Union have also followed the
Western countries in supporting their existing boundaries. The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) has supported the principle of territorial integrity in their main constitutional documents. In part their support
for the territorial integrity norm is attributable to pressure from the
Western countries, especially through the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), but the great majority of these countries
have recognized that respect for inherited boundaries (the principle of
uti possidetis) is in their mutual interest.32
Territorial Aggressions Since 1946: International Responses
and Outcomes
Prior to discussing the patterns of territorial wars in the post-1945 period I review some data on territorial wars since the seventeenth century
because they highlight the marked changes in international practices in
the late twentieth century. Table 12.1 contains data on international
territorial wars for five historical eras in international relations over the
past three and a half centuries and seven half-century periods. The five
historical eras are frequently used in historical analyses of the interstate
system. They are also employed by Kalevi Holsti from whose book this
chapter has drawn the list of wars for the period 1648–1945. The wars
listed by Holsti are major military conflicts in ‘‘the European and global
states system.’’33 He includes some civil wars, but they are excluded
from the conflicts examined here. Of the 119 interstate wars between
1648 and 1945, 93 were judged to be territorial wars in that Holsti classified them as being concerned with six issues that clearly involve state
control over territory.34 The list is not exhaustive of all territorial aggressions or wars, but it is extensive enough to reveal important patterns.
31

32
33
34

Donald M. Blinken and Alfred H. Moses, Hungary-Romania Pact: Historic but Ignored,
The Daily Yomuri (Tokyo), 21 September 1996, 11.
See MacFarlane 1999, 4; and Webber 1997.
Holsti 1991, 20.
See note to Table 12.1.

268

International Law and International Relations

The list of forty ‘‘territorial aggressions’’ for the period 1946–2000 is
drawn from extensive research in secondary materials. *** Territorial aggressions or wars include interstate armed conflicts where: a clear purpose
of the military attack was the change of boundaries of a state or its colonies; the invading state sought to capture some territory from the attached
state; *** the attacking states were widely recognized as sovereign states;
and the invasion or occupation lasted at least a week. Using this definition clearly reduces the value of comparisons with the pre-1946 territorial wars, but the value of using a larger group of territorial aggressions
for the recent period greatly assists our understanding of recent changes.35
Several key patterns emerge from the data in Table 12.1. First, and most
importantly, while approximately 80 percent of territorial wars led to
redistributions of territory for all periods prior to 1945, this figure dropped
to 30 percent after 1945. Second, the number of territorial redistributions
per year (given our list of wars) has varied by time period. It was about 0.24
from 1648 to 1814; it dropped to 0.19 between 1815 and 1917; it rose
dramatically to 0.59 between 1918 and 1945; and then it dropped back to
0.22 in the post-1945 period.
In looking at the average territorial redistributions per year, it is valuable to take into consideration that a larger population of territorial conflicts is included in the 1946–2000 period than in other periods and, more
importantly, that the number of states has increased dramatically over
recent centuries – especially since 1945. A recent study provides data on
the number of states (with certain characteristics) between 1816 and 1998,
and it allows us to control for the number of states in the international system by calculating the number of territorial redistributions per countryyear for particular periods of time. The figure for 1816–50 is 0.0032; for
1851–1900, 0.0035; for 1901–50, 0.0073; and 1951–98, 0.0015.36 These
35

36

The term ‘‘aggression’’ is more accurate than ‘‘war’’ for some of the conflicts since in
a few cases the attacked state did not resist militarily and in some cases the number of
deaths was small. However, such territorial occupations are often referred to as ‘‘wars’’
and therefore the terms ‘‘war’’ and ‘‘aggression’’ are used interchangeably.
Gleditsch and Ward 1999. The authors include states that meet the following criteria:
(1) they possessed autonomous administration over some territory; (2) they were regarded as distinct entities by local actors; and (3) they had a population over 250,000.
The average number of states per year between 1816 and 1850 was 53.05; between
1851 and 1900, 56.70; between 1901 and 1950, 63.42; and between 1951 and 1998,
134.58. The total number of territorial redistributions for these four periods was 6, 10,
23, and 10, respectively. To determine the number of territorial redistributions per
country-year for a particular period it is necessary to multiply the total number of years
by the average number of countries per year and to divide this sum into the total
number of redistributions for the period.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

269

figures indicate, of course, that the number of territorial redistributions
per country-year was more than twice as high in the nineteenth century
than it was in the last half of the twentieth century. Also, it was almost
five times higher in the first half of the twentieth century than in the second half. These figures have to be interpreted in light of the fact that the
criteria for the inclusion of wars differs for the pre- and post-1945 years,
and there is no claim of statistical significance.
The preceding figures do point to important changes in some patterns
of territorial armed conflict. However, it is also crucial to look at post1945 territorial wars (summarized in Table 12.2) in some detail since the
development and management of these conflicts reveal a great deal about
the strengthening of the norm. ***
* * *
It is clear that there have been very few cases of coercive boundary
change in the last half century during which UN membership has grown
from 50 to 190. No longer is territorial aggrandizement the dominant
motif of interstate politics; whereas in the three centuries leading up to
1946, about 80 percent of all interstate territorial wars led to territorial
redistributions, for the period 1946–2000, the figure is 30 percent (twelve
out of forty) (Table 12.1a). Given the huge increase in the number of states
in the international system in the past half century and our definition of
territorial wars for the period, the absolute numbers of forty territorial
wars and twelve cases of major boundary change are not very large by
historical standards. Two of the successful uses of force involved turbulent decolonization processes in 1947 and 1948 in the Indian subcontinent and former British Palestine, and the other ten occurred between
1961 and 1975. Of these ten wars, the UN passed resolutions calling
for withdrawal in four of them (Israel-Arab states in 1967, IndiaPakistan in 1971, Turkey-Cyprus in 1974, and Morocco-Spanish Sahara
in 1975). Another three of the ten (India-Portugal in 1961, IndonesiaNetherlands in 1961–62, and North Vietnam-South Vietnam from 1962
to 1975) were viewed by many countries as stages of the decolonization process. The remaining two involved China’s occupation of remote
areas – parts of northern India in 1962 and South Vietnam’s Paracel Islands
in 1974.
An interesting characteristic of territorial wars concerns the role of
international organizations in bringing them to an end, since multilateral responses often reflect broad international backing for the norm.
In the four territorial wars in Europe (except for the quick war

270

Yugoslavia–
Bosnia,
1992–95

Yugoslavia–
Croatia,
1991–95

Yugoslavia–
Slovenia, 1991

Europe
Turkey–Cyprus,
1974–present

States involved

Turkey invaded Cyprus to protect the
Turkish Cypriot community. It gathered
all Turkish Cypriots into the northern
40 percent of the island. In 1983 Turkey
supported the creation of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC).
Turkish troops remain in the TRNC.
Yugoslavia’s armed forces attacked to try
to reverse Slovenia’s departure from the
federation after Slovenia declared
independence on 25 June 1991.
Croatia declared independence in 1991.
Yugoslavia (Serbia-Montenegro) sent troops
to assist Serbs in Croatia (12 percent of pop.)
who wanted to attach their areas to Yugoslavia.
Most Serb troops defending Serb enclaves came
from Croatia, but some came from Yugoslavia.
Bosnia declared independence in 1992. Serb
population of Bosnia (assisted by Yugoslav
military) fought against an alliance of Bosnian
Muslims and Bosnian Croats. The Serb forces
wanted to unite parts of Bosnia with Yugoslavia.
The Croatian army intervened at times, and
in a few instances it fought Muslim forces.

Issue

(continued)

No change

No change

No change

Yugoslavia ceased its attack after eight days
of fighting and withdrew from Slovenia.

UN called for withdrawal of foreign troops
and a cease-fire. Fighting killed 15,000.
Main Serb force was defeated in 1995.
Dayton accord in 1995 recognized former
boundary. Yugoslavia and Croatia recognized
boundary in bilateral treaty in August 1996.
UN called for withdrawal of non-Bosnian
troops and cease-fire. The fighting killed
200,000. The 1995 Dayton accord created a
multiethnic government and recognized the
original boundaries of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Yugoslavia and Bosnia recognized boundary
in bilateral treaty in October 1996.

Major change

Change

The UN and NATO opposed the invasion and
recognition of the TRNC. Western and UN
attempts to negotiate a settlement based
on a federation of the two sections of the
island have failed. Only Turkey recognizes
the TRNC.

Outcome

table 12.2. Interstate Territorial Aggressions, 1946–2000

271

Egypt occupied a small area of Sudanese
territory.
Ghana occupied a small border area
of Upper Volta in 1963.
Morocco occupied a part of Algeria.

Somalia provided troops to Somali
rebels in eastern Ethiopia and northern
Kenya seeking union with Somalia.
In 1973 Libya secretly occupied a border
area of Chad called the Aouzou Strip.

Somalia–Ethiopia
and Kenya,
1964
Libya–Chad,
1973–87

Argentina occupied Malvinas/Falkland
islands.
Ecuador sent troops into an area it lost
in peace treaty at end of 1942 war.

Nicaragua occupied a part of Honduras.

Issue

Africa
Egypt–Sudan,
1958
Ghana–Upper
Volta, 1963–65
Algeria–Morocco,
1963

The Americas
Nicaragua–
Honduras,
1957
Argentina–
Britain, 1982
Ecuador–Peru,
1995

States involved

OAU tried to secure Libyan withdrawal
in 1980s. Libya was driven out by
Chad in 1987. ICJ arbitration was accepted
in 1990. ICJ ruled in Chad’s favor in 1994.

No change

In 1965 OAU supported original
boundary. Ghana withdrew.
Arab League and OAU called for
withdrawal. OAU established mediators.
Morocco withdrew.
OAU supported original boundaries and
established mediator. Somalia withdrew.

(continued)

No change

No change

No change

No change

No change

No change

No change

Change

Arab League pressured Egypt to withdraw.

Nicaragua withdrew and accepted ICJ
arbitration because of OAS pressure. ICJ
awarded territory to Houduras in 1959.
UN called for Argentina’s withdrawal.
Britain reoccupied islands.
Four guarantor powers of 1942 treaty
promoted withdrawal. The two states
signed a border treaty in 1998.

Outcome

272

Eritrea–Ethiopia,
1998–2000

Mali–Burkina
Faso, 1985

Libya–Chad,
1981–82

Uganda–Tanzania,
1978
Morocco–Spanish
Sahara,
1975–2000

Africa (cont.)
Mali–Burkina
Faso, 1975
Somalia–Ethiopia,
1976–80

States involved

Eritrea and Ethiopia dispute sovereignty
over several small border regions. Eritrea
occupied some areas in 1998. In 1999 and
2000 Ethiopia regained control of all areas.

Mali claimed a small area of Burkina Faso
in 1960. Mali occupied the area in 1975.
Somalia occupied most of the Ogaden
region of Ethiopia. Ethiopia received
military forces from Cuba.
Uganda occupied a small part of
Tanzania.
Morocco claimed Spanish Sahara prior to
independence and sent in military contingents
in 1975. Under pressure Spain agreed to
cede the colony. Since 1976 Morocco and
the independence movement Polisario
have conducted a continuous war.
Libya pressured Chad to accept a political
union in exchange for military assistance
in its civil war.
Dispute over a small strip existed from
time of independence and led to violence
again.

Issue

Outcome

OAU opposed union and provided some
troops. Chad ended political union and
Libya withdrew troops.
In 1985 they accepted ICJ arbitration as
a result of OAU mediation. In 1986 ICJ
divided the area equally between the
two states.
The OAU and the Western powers promoted
a cease-fire, a withdrawal to the pre-1998
boundary, and arbitration based on colonial
treaties. These were accepted in June 2000.

OAU mediated a cease-fire and
withdrawal by Mali.
An OAU committee called for respect for
former boundary. Somalia withdrew all
forces by 1980.
Within several weeks of Tanzanian
military action, Uganda withdrew.
The OAU and the UN have called for
Moroccan withdrawal and a referendum.
The UN tried to organize a referendum
during the 1990s. (Mauritania occupied part
of Spanish Sahara from 1976 to 1978.)

table 12.2 (continued)

(continued)

No change

Minor change

No change

Major change

No change

No change

No change

Change

273

North Korea–
South Korea,
1950–53

North Korea attempted to absorb South Korea.

British India was partitioned and India and
Pakistan became independent in 1947. Pakistan
army joined Muslim rebels in Kashmir who
were seeking union of Kashmir with Pakistan.

Iraq invaded Kuwait and annexed it.

Iraq–Kuwait,
1990–91

Asia
Pakistan–India,
1947–48

Egypt and Syria sought to recapture the
Sinai and Golan Heights.

Britain accepted a UN recommendation to
divide Palestine into Israeli and Arab states.
Neighboring Arab states attacked Israel at
time of independence in May 1948 to
support Palestinian Arabs’ claim to entire area.
Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip,
Sinai, and Golan Heights. It later annexed
East Jerusalem and applied Israeli law to
Golan Heights.

Issue

Egypt and
Syria–Israel,
1973

Israel–Arab
states, 1967

Middle East
Arab states–
Israel, 1948

States involved

Pakistan secured control over a sparsely
populated third of Kashmir by end of war.
UN Security Council supported plebiscite
during war, but India did not accept it.
Post-1948 border is the Line of Control.
Armistice line reflects very minor
changes in former boundary.

Most UN members called for Iraq’s withdrawal.
Iraq was expelled by a UN-sanctioned force.

Israel gained territory in each stage of the
war. At end of 1948 both sides accepted
armistice lines. Arab Palestinians retained
control of the West Bank and Gaza Strip
(administered by Jordan and Egypt).
UN Security Council in November 1967 called
for withdrawal of Israel to 1948 armistice lines
in exchange for recognition by Arab states of
Israel. In 1978 Israel agreed to return the Sinai;
in 1993 Israel accepted staged implementation
of self-rule for West Bank and Gaza.
UN Security Council called for cease-fire.
Fighting ended after two weeks. Egypt was
allowed to keep a small enclave in the Sinai.

Outcome

(continued)

Minor change

Major change

No change

Minor change

Major change

Major change

Change

274

Indonesia–
Malaysia,
1963–65
Pakistan–India,
April 1965

China–India,
1962
North Vietnam–
South
Vietnam,
1962–75

India–Portugal,
1961
Indonesia–
Netherlands,
1961–62

Asia (continued)
China–Burma,
1956
Afghanistan–
Pakistan, 1961

States involved

China occupied Aksai Chin and part of
Northeast Frontier Agency that it claimed.
France administered the northern and southern
parts of Vietnam separately prior to 1954.
After independence in 1954 South Vietnam
did not allow a referendum on unification
as provided in the Paris peace accord. By 1962
North Vietnamese forces were fighting with
the Viet Cong to promote unification.
Indonesia claimed the Malaysian territory of
North Borneo, and it introduced military
contingents to expel Malaysian authorities.
Pakistan sent a force into the Rann of Kutch.

China moved into a small border area
of Burma.
Afghanistan sent irregular Afghan forces into
the Pathanistan region of Pakistan to support
local forces favoring union with Afghanistan.
India invaded and absorbed the
Portuguese-controlled colony of Goa.
Indonesia claimed West New Guinea (West
Irian) over which the Netherlands had
colonial control. Indonesia invaded in 1961.

Issue

Outcome

Minor change

Britain negotiated a cease-fire and the parties
agreed to an arbitration that awarded
10 percent of the area to Pakistan in 1968.

(continued)

No change

Major change

Major change

Major change

Major change

No change

Minor change

Change

Britain and Australia sent troops to help
Malaysia. Indonesia was unsuccessful.

In 1975 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong
forces defeated the South Vietnamese army,
and the two areas were reunified.

Most states accepted the legitimacy of
India’s action.
In 1962 Indonesia and the Netherlands
agreed to a plebiscite after one year of UN
administration. The plebiscite favored
integration with Indonesia.
China still occupies the areas.

The two states negotiated a new border that
gave China a part of the area it occupied.
Afghan incursions were defeated by
Pakistan.

table 12.2 (continued)

275

Iraq invaded Iran to seize control of the Shatt
al-Arab waterway and some other areas.

Cambodia attacked Vietnam to establish
control over a small border region.

Pakistan attacked India to secure control of the
Indian-controlled part of Kashmir.
The Bengali population in East Pakistan sought
to secede from Pakistan. Indian troops
intervened in the civil war to secure the
creation of Bangladesh.
Upon Britain’s granting of independence to the
UAE Iran occupied some of the islands in the
Straits of Hormuz that belonged to the UAE.
China expelled South Vietnam from the western
Paracel Islands that it claimed.
Indonesia invaded East Timor several months
before it was to achieve independence from
Portugal. It made it a province of Indonesia.

Issue

UN Security Council backed acceptance
of former boundary in 1987. The two
states accepted a cease-fire in 1988 and
the former boundary in 1990.

UN demanded Indonesian withdrawal and
self-determination through 1982. In 1999
Indonesia relented to international pressure
and allowed a referendum that led to
independence.
Cambodian forces were defeated. War was
the result mainly of political conflicts.

China maintains control of the islands.

Pakistan was defeated. USSR and Western
powers backed the 1948 Line of Control.
The UN General Assembly called for Indian
withdrawal; India did not withdraw,
and it facilitated the creation of
Bangladesh.
Iran maintains control of the islands.

Outcome

No change

No change

No change

Major change

Major change

Major change

No change

Change

Note: Of the forty interstate territorial conflicts listed here, twelve involved major redistributions of territory, and five involved minor alterations of borders. A
‘‘minor change’’ refers to small border adjustments. Any change apart from a minor border alteration is regarded as a ‘‘major change.’’ The conflict over the
Spratly Islands, which involves China, Taiwan, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei, is not included because there has never been any local or international
consensus on jurisdictions. See Haller-Trost 1990; and Lo 1989.

Cambodia–
Vietnam,
1977–78
Iraq–Iran,
1980–88

China–South
Vietnam, 1974
Indonesia–
Portugal
(East Timor),
1975–99

Asia (continued)
Pakistan–India,
August 1965
India–Pakistan
(creation of
Bangladesh),
1971
Iran–United Arab
Emirates, 1971

States involved

276

International Law and International Relations

between Yugoslavia and Slovenia in 1991) the NATO states and the
UN were active in promoting respect for boundaries. In the Western
Hemisphere the OAS or an important group of OAS members was
active in promoting a withdrawal of forces in two conflicts, and the UN
backed withdrawal in the other. In Africa the OAU was very active in
ten of the twelve territorial wars (one being prior to the OAU’s
creation), and the UN played a role in several conflicts as well. In the
Middle East the UN played a significant role in promoting a return to
the status quo ante in three territorial wars (not the Arab-Israeli war of
1948). In Asia international organizations have not been active in
most of the seventeen territorial wars. However, the UN had a major
long-term role in promoting Indonesia’s recent withdrawal from East
Timor.
The Boundaries of Successor States
In discussing the post-1945 stabilization of boundaries another pattern
of international behavior should be noted, since it is closely related to support for the prohibition of the use of force to alter boundaries. During
the postwar period, all of the successor states that emerged from the nine
breakups of existing states have kept their former internal administrative
boundaries as their new international boundaries.37 In fact, in cases where
some doubt existed as to whether the successor states would accept these
boundaries, outside countries pressured the successor states to adopt their
former administrative boundaries as their new interstate borders. This
indicates that states generally desire predictability regarding the international territorial order. They do not like secessions, but if they are going
to occur, they do not want the successor states fighting over what their
boundaries should be.
Some of the best examples of international policy on this issue concern the breakups of the former Yugoslavia and the former Soviet Union.
37

Syria’s secession from the UAR in 1961, Singapore’s secession from Malaysia in 1965,
Bangladesh’s secession from Pakistan in 1971, Gambia’s secession from Senegambia in
1989, Namibia’s secession from South Africa in 1990, Eritrea’s secession from Ethiopia
in 1993, the breakup of the former Soviet Union into fifteen states in 1991, Yugoslavia’s
breakup into five states in 1991–92, and Slovakia’s secession from Czechoslovakia
in 1992. In the case of Eritrea-Ethiopia, they maintained the former internal administrative boundary from 1993 to 1998. In 1998 Eritrea occupied several small border
areas, and in 1999 and 2000 Ethiopia regained the lost territories. In 2000 the OAU
backed withdrawal of all forces behind the pre-1998 boundary and the establishment of
an arbitral body to settle the dispute.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

277

The United States and the European powers went to tremendous lengths
to preserve the former internal administrative boundaries of Croatia
and Bosnia as their new international boundaries. These boundaries
were legitimated in the Western countries’ recognition of these states
in 1992, the 1995 Dayton accord, and the 1996 accords between
Yugoslavia (Serbia), on the one hand, and Croatia and Bosnia, on the
other.38 The Western countries have also been active in promoting respect
among the Soviet successor states for the boundaries they originally
possessed as Soviet republics. Concerning why the former internal
boundaries have been maintained as interstate borders, Neil MacFarlane
has remarked:
Most significant . . . are the norms of sovereignty and non-intervention and
the principle of territorial integrity. The 15 republics of the former Soviet
space exist in the territorial boundaries defined under Soviet rule, whether or
not they make sense in ethno-geographical terms, or correspond to the
aspirations of the people living within them. They do so in part because
Western states and international organizations . . . have self-consciously
promoted these norms. . . . For better or worse, the West is committed to
the attempt to address problems relating to minority rights within the context
of acceptance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the new states.39

Western efforts at promoting the territorial integrity of the successor states
(often through the OSCE) have focused on keeping Nagorno-Karabakh
(an Armenian enclave) within Azerbaijan and keeping Abkahzia and
Ossetia within Georgia, but Western policy has had a broader impact as
well in strengthening the international territorial order among the Soviet
successor states.40
It is impossible to declare that the acceptance of internal administrative
boundaries as interstate boundaries for secessionist states is now an
authoritative rule of international practice. Quite possibly, however, this
norm will become entrenched as a part of the new territorial order that
flows from states’ concern for reducing the incidence of destructive wars
and wars’ impact on commercial relations. States and international commercial interests increasingly abhor violence and uncertainty over what
political entities have jurisdiction over particular geographical spaces.
38
39
40

See Weller 1992, 587, 602; and Ullman 1996.
MacFarlane 1999, 4, 16.
See Baranovsky 1966, 267–78; Webber 1997; MacFarlane and Minnear 1997; and
Menon 1998. Armenia’s support for the Armenian population in Azerbaijan is not
regarded as an interstate territorial war because Armenia (some of whose army fought
for Nagorno-Karabakh) has not explicitly backed secession by Nagorno-Karabakh.

278

International Law and International Relations
Overview of Stages in the Development of the Norm

In concluding the discussion of the evolution of normative declarations
and state practices concerning coercive territorial revisionism, it is valuable to look at past developments as falling into a number of stages. Two
scholars have identified three stages of norm development as emergence,
acceptance, and institutionalization.41 The emergence stage is marked by
a growing advocacy of the new norm by important countries and nongovernmental groups and some multilateral declarations. The acceptance
stage is characterized by growing support for the norm and its integration into treaties to that point where it is viewed as legally binding by
most countries. The institutionalization stage includes the integration of
the norm in additional international accords and more effective multilateral efforts to promote state compliance.
Before moving to an analysis of the three stages of norm development
during the twentieth century, I offer some observations about the nineteenth century. The magnitude of international violence declined from
1815 to 1913 as a result of regular consultations within the framework
of the Concert of Europe, but the great powers were involved periodically
in territorial aggrandizement within the Western state system as well as
in colonial expansion in the Southern Hemisphere. In fact, territorial adjustments in Europe and in the colonial world were central to maintaining a balance of power.
The emergence stage of norm development started with the end of
World War I and more particularly Article 10 of the League Covenant,
and it lasted through the end of World War II. The major proponents
of the norm were the Western democratic states. During this period
major multilateral treaties and declarations for the first time upheld the
territorial integrity norm – particularly the 1919 League Covenant, the
1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact, and the League’s approval of the Stimson
Doctrine in 1931. At the same time the great powers tolerated a number
of territorial aggressions, and Germany, Italy, and Japan became increasingly committed to territorial expansion in the 1930s. The emergence stage was very bloody, but it was states’ experience with this era
of destructive territorial aggrandizement that increased support for the
norm after World War II.
The acceptance stage of norm development began with the adoption
of Article 2(4) in the UN Charter in June 1945, and it lasted until the
41

Finnemore and Sikkink 1999, 254–61.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

279

mid-1970s. It was not until the 1960s and early 1970s that broad
and strong backing for the norm became palpable. The key post1945 multilateral accords were the 1960 UN declaration that upheld
the territorial integrity of states and pronounced that existing colonies
(not ethnic groups) were eligible for self-determination; the OAU’s 1963
charter provision *** supporting respect for inherited boundaries; and
the 1975 CSCE’s Helsinki Final Act with its proscription that boundaries
could only be altered by consent. In 1975 the last case of significant
territorial revisionism occurred – Morocco’s absorption of the Spanish
Sahara.
The institutionalization (strengthening) stage of norm development
encompassed the period from 1976 to the present; no major cases of
successful territorial aggrandizement have occurred during this period.
The key events that strengthened the norm were states’ responses to
individual conflicts. Particularly noteworthy cases were Somalia’s war
against Ethiopia, 1976–80; Iraq’s occupation of Kuwait, 1990–91;
and Yugoslavia’s attempts to absorb parts of Croatia and Bosnia,
1992–95. Also important was the decision by Indonesia in 1999 to
allow a referendum in East Timor. Another noteworthy development
during this period was the International Court of Justice’s adjudication of several territorial conflicts. The court based its decisions on
the principle of uti possidetis, which means that states have rights to
those territories that were legally ceded to them by prior governing
states and that other states do not have the right to take these territories
by force.42

roots of the new territorial order
International practices regarding the use of force to alter boundaries
have changed markedly in recent years, and in this section I analyze the
reason for this transformation in the international order. At the heart of
this analysis are several general assertions. First, states have backed the
norm for both instrumental and ideational reasons, though the former
have dominated. Instrumental reasons are rooted in perceptions of how
a norm and congruent practices benefit the self-interests of countries.
Ideational reasons are rooted in changing views of ethical behavior
toward other peoples and states. A number of scholars have recognized
that both instrumental and ideational factors influence the evolution of
42

Prescott 1998, 241–52.

280

International Law and International Relations

norms and that applying an ‘‘either/or’’ approach concerning their
influence is wrong.43
Second, the reasons for such a change in beliefs and practices have varied
among countries, and no single factor explains the support for the norm
among a particular grouping of states.44 These factors include the perceived
relationship between territorial aggrandizement and major international
wars, the power relations between possible territorial aggressors and the
major powers supporting the norm, the costs and benefits of territorial
aggrandizement, and moral predispositions concerning territorial aggression. Although we can speculate about the relative importance of specific
factors, providing definitive conclusions about the weight of each is
difficult when the factors have generally pressured states in the same
direction. It appears that the coincidence of several factors has been crucial
for both the Western and the developing states’ backing of the norm.
Among the Western industrialized states, the association of territorial
revisionism with major wars was the central driving force that led these
states after World Wars I and II to advocate a prohibition of coercive
territorial revisionism. The key international affirmations of the norm
were after the world wars in 1919 and 1945 and at the 1975 Helsinki
conference whose central purpose was the prevention of a major war
between the Western and Soviet alliances. Territorial aggrandizement
was not the central motivation of the key antagonists in World War I,
but it played a part in states’ participation and the postwar settlements.
Also, attempts to promote national self-determination and hence border changes exacerbated feelings of international hostility after World
War I, and this made many states wary of this justification for territorial revisionism. To quote Michael Howard, ‘‘The Mazzinian doctrine,
that peace could result only from national self-determination, had left
its followers in disarray. It had caused chaos at the Paris peace conference, and it was increasingly clear that this mode of thought lent itself far more readily to right-wing authoritarianism . . . than it did to
any form of parliamentary democracy.’’45
43

44

45

See Nadelmann 1990; Finnemore 1996; Finnemore and Sikkink 1999; Jackson 1993; and
Ruggie 1999.
The Soviet bloc is not specifically discussed in this section. It was generally supportive of
existing boundaries because it wanted to legitimize the Eastern European boundaries
that were established in 1945. Like the Western powers it occasionally supported
territorial revisionism for Cold War reasons, for example, Afghanistan-Pakistan, 1961;
and Indonesia-Malaysia, 1963–65.
Howard 1978, 95.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

281

The fear of territorial aggrandizement as a cause of major war was
exacerbated by World War II because the origins of the war lay significantly in German and Japanese territorial ambitions. The Western states
came to fear the right of national self-determination, and particularly
the right to unite national compatriots in different states, since it encouraged territorial irredentism and xenophobic nationalism.46 ***
Because Western countries’ support for democratic political institutions grew during the development of the norm,47 it is important to ask
whether their liberal democratic ethos influenced their acceptance of
the territorial integrity norm. This question involves considering the
reasons why democratic states might eschew wars of territorial aggrandizement, the views of democratic leaders, and democratic and nondemocratic states’ patterns of territorial aggrandizement. The key factor
that has probably influenced democratic states’ opposition to territorial
aggrandizement is touched on in John Owen’s study concerning the
democratic peace in which he notes that ‘‘liberalism as a system of
thought’’ is particularly attached to ‘‘self-legislation or self-government’’
and ‘‘self-determination.’’48 It is these values that have shaped the policies of democratic leaders toward coercive territorial revisionism.
In the late stages of World War I President Wilson commented that
‘‘no right exists anywhere to hand peoples about from sovereignty to
sovereignty without their consent,’’49 and Prime Minister David Lloyd
remarked that any territorial changes had to be based on ‘‘the consent
of the governed.’’50 If the citizens of liberal states adhered to this principle of not imposing a new government on people by force, they would
definitely be opposed to using force to change interstate boundaries –
unless possibly a liberal state sought to assist the secession of a national
minority in a foreign country. However, the dangers of supporting
46

47

48

49
50

See Cobban 1969; Mayall 1990; and Franck 1990, 155–74. The destructiveness of past
territorial wars also encouraged Latin American states to oppose territorial revisionism.
Holsti 1996, 150–84.
Michael Doyle has noted that the number of liberal states grew from three in 1800; to
eight in 1850; thirteen in 1900; twenty-nine in 1945; and forty-nine in 1980. Doyle 1996,
56. With recent changes in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Asia the number is now
considerably higher.
Owen 1997, 32. Malcolm Anderson has identified another influence on liberal
democrats’ support for the sanctity of boundaries – namely, that established boundaries
are ‘‘essential for ordered constitutional politics.’’ Anderson 1996, 8. For a discussion of
institutional and cultural factors that have influenced the democratic zone of peace, see
Russett et al. 1993.
Korman 1996, 136.
Lloyd George 1936, 1524–26.

282

International Law and International Relations

national secessionist groups have been clearly recognized by liberal
democratic states. While self-determination for ethnic groups is at times
viewed sympathetically by liberals, it is ‘‘trumped’’ by their recognition that the logical outcome of allowing self-determination for
every national group would be continual warfare. Self-determination has
had to be compromised in the pursuit of physical security, which is itself
necessary for individuals’ realization of liberty. ***
The proclivity of democratic states to eschew territorial aggrandizement is reflected in their evolving practices regarding territorial annexations at the end of the world wars and in their colonial policies. At
the end of World War I, the Triple Entente states and their democratic
allies gained little territory. Britain and the United States, whose President Wilson led the fight for ‘‘no annexations,’’ did not establish sovereignty over any new territories, and France only reestablished
sovereignty over Alsace-Lorraine. Among the smaller allies, Belgium
obtained a small border area from Germany; Denmark secured twothirds of Scheswig-Holstein from Germany as a result of a referendum;
and Italy and Greece obtained small, but strategic, territories from
Austria and Bulgaria. The Italian and Greek gains might be explained
by the relatively new and unstable character of their democratic regimes,
which collapsed in the interwar period.51 France, Britain, Australia, and
New Zealand (as well as Japan and South Africa) secured League
mandates that previously belonged to the defeated powers, and while
there was no obligation to bring them to independence, there was an
implicit responsibility to move in this direction for the A mandates and
to a lesser extent the B mandates as well.52 Some signs of a new normative orientation on territorial issues were present in the policies of the
victorious democratic states at the end of World War I, but the old
order that sanctioned annexations and colonialism still had a significant
influence. As happened with the expansion of the voting franchise in the
Western states, progress in promoting liberal democratic values about
territorial revisionism occurred in stages.
In the case of the settlements at the end of World War II, no Western
power achieved territorial control over new areas (except UN trusteeships that they were to prepare for independence),53 whereas the authoritarian Soviet Union obtained sovereign control over significant areas
51
52

53

Gleditsch and Ward 2000.
See Howard 1978, 83–84; and Lyons 2000, 302–12. One clearly authoritarian ally of the
Triple Entente was Romania, and it gained considerable territory.
Claude 1964, 285–302.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

283

in eastern Europe as well as some of Japan’s northern islands. The democratic Western European states still clung to the legitimacy of colonial
empires through the immediate post–World War II years, but by the
1950s they had all committed themselves to decolonization. However,
the authoritarian regimes in Portugal and Spain resisted granting independence to their colonies until their democratic transformations in
1974. Granting the right of self-determination to colonies flowed from
the very same ideational source as did opposition to violent territorial
revisionism – namely, a liberal democratic belief that it is wrong to
impose rule on the people of another juridical state or a part thereof. ***
The reluctance of democratic states to engage in territorial aggrandizement is also seen in their infrequent territorial aggressions since World
War I. Between 1919 and 1945 there were twenty territorial wars; the
only democratic state to achieve territorial gains was Poland in 1922,
and its democratic government did not have deep social roots, as the
1926 coup d’etat indicated.54 Since 1945 the only territorial wars that
have been initiated by democratic states have been India’s absorption of
the Portuguese colony of Goa in 1961, Israel’s invasion of three Arab
neighbors in 1967 following Arab sabre rattling, and Ecuador’s invasion
of Peru in 1995.55 The other thirty-seven territorial aggressions have
been by nondemocratic states.
In dwelling on whether the association of territorial revisionism and
major war or a liberal respect for other states is the crucial factor that
shaped Western states’ support for the territorial integrity norm, it is
interesting to ask what might have happened if the other factor had not
been present. First, if democracy had not grown steadily in the Western
world during the twentieth century, would the Western states have opted
for the sanctity of states’ borders because of the linking of territorial
revisionism and major war? They might have adopted this strategy after
the carnage of the two world wars, but it is problematic whether the
policy would have endured without a moral belief that other juridical
states deserved their respect. After all, the Western states did not support
the territorial integrity norm following major wars prior to the twentieth
54

55

See Table 12.1a; and Holsti 1991, 213–42. On the war proneness of new and unstable
democratic states, see Gleditsch and Ward 2000.
Huth found that of forty-one territorial disputes occurring between 1950 and 1990, the
only one where a state with fifteen years of democratic rule was the challenger was the
Indian invasion of Goa. Huth 1996, 136–37. Mitchell and Prins found that of the ninetyseven territorial ‘‘militarized disputes’’ occurring between 1815 and 1992, only two were
between well-established democracies; and these two occurred between 1945 and 1992.
Mitchell and Prins 1999.

284

International Law and International Relations

century (for example, the Thirty Years’ War and the Napoleonic Wars).
Second, if territorial revisionism had not been a very important cause
of major wars, would the democratic states have come down strongly
for a prohibition against coercive territorial revisionism? Again, it is
doubtful (probably more doubtful) because without a fear that territorial
revisionism could lead to regional or world wars, they probably would
have opted for the right of self-determination for all ethnic or national
groups. Liberal states were clearly influenced to support the right of
self-determination for juridical states, and hence the territorial integrity
norm, because warfare was so horrific in the twentieth century. Indicative of this perspective is a provision in President Wilson’s first draft of
the League Covenant: ‘‘The parties accept without reservation the principle that the peace of the world is superior in importance to every question
of political jurisdiction or boundary.’’56 A fear of a major war and a liberal democratic respect for other juridical states clearly have a symbiotic
relationship that has motivated these countries to support the territorial
integrity norm, and it is highly problematic whether the norm would
have achieved the strength it has if both factors had not been present.
In considering the support for the territorial integrity norm by nonWestern or developing states, we must first recognize that most of them
have not experienced very destructive territorial wars in recent centuries
and have not had liberal democratic governments in the postwar era.
Their backing of the norm generally stems from the existence of ethnic
groups that overlap borders and can provoke territorial irredentism, the
military weakness of many developing states vis-a`-vis their neighbors,
and their weakness vis-a`-vis Western supporters of the norm. However,
changing economic costs and benefits of territorial aggrandizement have
undoubtedly had an influence in recent decades.
Among developing states, many (especially in Africa) have feared
territorial aggressions because of the likelihood of irredentist claims resulting from ethnic groups’ overlapping borders and their own military
weakness.57 These developing states made sure that the 1960 UN Declaration on Granting Independence to Colonial Territories and Countries
established that the peoples of existing colonial territories, not ethnic
groups, are eligible for self-determination and that the territorial integrity
of all states should be respected.58 Through regional organizations
56
57
58

Miller 1928, 23 (Art. 3).
See Jackson 1990; and Touval 1972.
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, UNGA
res. 1514, 1960.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

285

and the UN, the African, Middle Eastern, and Latin American states have
also been very active in opposing territorial aggrandizement and secessionist movements (for example, Biafra) and in securing great power
backing through concerted diplomatic advocacy.
Another concern that has been (and still is) very important in promoting support of the territorial integrity norm among developing states is
their recognition that they will probably meet strong Western opposition
if they embark on territorial aggression. In the Cold War the Western
states provided assistance to their many allies in the developing world if
they were subject to territorial revisionist threats or attacks. Good examples are South Korea in 1950, Kuwait in 1961 (a threat of invasion from
Iraq), and Malaysia in 1963. In addition, the Western states generally
opposed their allies when they pursued territorial expansionism.59 *** In
a few cases, such as South Korea in 1950 and Kuwait in 1990, the
Western powers actually sent significant military forces to repel invasions.
And in Eastern Europe the NATO countries bombed Serb forces as
part of their attempt to promote respect for the boundaries of Bosnia
and Croatia. If it had not been for the Western democratic powers’ (and
especially the United States’) willingness to employ their military and
economic leverage in many territorial wars over the entire post-1945 era,
the norm against coercive territorial revisionism would not have been
sustained. However, the Western powers could not have enforced the
norm in the developing world without the backing of the great majority
of non-Western states. A crucial factor in the strength of the territorial
integrity norm in the developing world is the coincidence of most
developing states’ opposition to coercive territorial revisionism and the
willingness of the Western states to use their power to reverse territorial
aggressions.
In addition to the aforementioned international conditions and beliefs
sustaining the prohibition against coercive territorial change, scholars
have observed that a number of economic trends reduce the benefits and
increase the costs of coercive territorial revisionism. These trends have
undoubtedly had an important impact on strengthening support for the
norm in recent decades, but it is doubtful whether they could be regarded
as important factors in securing its diplomatic acceptance between World
War I and the 1960s. These economic trends influence why states are less
59

In a few cases the Western powers backed territorial revisionism for strategic reasons
related to the Cold War. They favored the absorption of the Spanish Sahara by Morocco
and Mauritania and East Timor by Indonesia in 1975 prior to their independence because of the political orientation of their independence movements during the Cold War.

286

International Law and International Relations

motivated to pursue territorial aggrandizement themselves, not why they
would oppose such actions by other states.
First, the declining value of land as a factor of production in modern
economies means that the conquest of foreign territory no longer brings
the same benefits that it did in the pre-industrial era. Robert Gilpin has
observed that a state can now gain more ‘‘through specialization and
international trade’’ than it can ‘‘through territorial expansion and conquests.’’60 This is clearly true, but land has been viewed by some countries
in the twentieth century as quite valuable. It was certainly viewed as
valuable by Germany and Japan in the 1930s and 1940s – a time when
the territorial integrity norm was beginning to attract strong support.
Today the accomplishments of countries such as South Korea and
Singapore are leading to a recognition that economic development depends first and foremost on human skills and not on control of territory;
but this recognition has not been strong enough, and it did not come
soon enough in this century, to be seen as a crucial factor in driving
broad acceptance of the territorial integrity norm.
Second, some scholars argue that the occupation of foreign territory
is more difficult and costly in an era of national consciousness, and therefore states are less prone toward territorial expansionism.61 This view is
true in many circumstances, but as Peter Lieberman’s study has pointed
out, the occupation of foreign territories can be beneficial as long as the
occupying states do not meet large-scale military resistance and are
willing to use considerable force to suppress local populations.62 In
World War II foreign occupiers were certainly willing to adopt such
policies of suppression. We should also recognize that quite a few cases
of potential territorial revisionism today concern a desire to unite ethnic
brethren in different countries, and in this case the problem of needing to
suppress local populations would not exist.
Finally, some political observers adopt a traditional liberal stance
that war generally, and territorial wars in particular, are increasingly
being rejected in this century because they disrupt valuable economic
interdependencies.63 This hypothesis is true to a degree. However, such
interdependencies were not adequate to deter major wars throughout
most of this century. In fact, such interdependencies were quite strong

60
61
62
63

See Gilpin 1981, 125, 132; and Kaysen 1990, 54.
See Deutsch 1953; Kaysen 1990, 53; and Lieberman 1996.
Lieberman 1996.
See Rosecrance 1986 and 1996; and Zacher and Matthew 1995, 124–26.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

287

in 1914.64 Their impacts are certainly stronger at the end of the twentieth
century as a result of the recent growth of international economic transactions, but they are unlikely to assure a rejection of coercive territorial
revisionism by the majority of countries. For one thing, many states are
highly interdependent with a relatively small number of other states
(often not including contiguous states), and wars with most countries
would not have major impacts on their commercial interactions.
Another way to reflect on the roots of the territorial integrity norm is
to look at what has happened to the major incentives for territorial aggrandizement: the search for economic gains, the search for strategic gains, and
the protection of national brethren. In the case of a striving for economic
gain, the benefits of territorial aggression are much lower now since land
alone does not provide the resources it once provided when agricultural
production was a central source of wealth. Also, the economic costs of
occupying land inhabited by a different ethnic group can be very high.
The use of territorial aggrandizement to achieve strategic gain, or an
improvement in a state’s relative power, has concerned the occupation of
territories well situated for launching military operations, the exploitation of captured land as a source of national wealth, and the unification
of ethnic brethren in other countries so as to increase the state’s population base. Having strategically located territory is less important now
than it once was because of the mobility of planes, missiles, and ships – in
our technologically advanced era, land provides less power potential
than it once did. Finally, increasing the population base of loyal nationals
still gives a state more power, but in this case an expansionist state would
have to meet the costs of international opposition.
The final motivation for territorial aggrandizement, protecting fellow
nationals, has concerned the protection of ethnic compatriots who are
being mistreated in other states and the unification of nationals in a single state. This motivation cannot be squelched, but it is much more difficult now for states to embark on attempts to protect and absorb fellow
nationals in foreign states when their civil rights are respected. A central
reason why the Western states have been so active in promoting minority rights (particularly through the OSCE) is that they want to remove
any justification for foreign intervention and territorial aggrandizement.
64

Thompson and Krasner 1989. Ethan Nadelmann has made an interesting comment about
the demise of piracy and privateering in the seventeenth century that is relevant to the
gradual strengthening of the territorial integrity norm: ‘‘The advantage to be derived from
stealing from one another was giving way to the greater advantage of stable commercial
relations.’’ Nadelmann 1990, 487.

288

International Law and International Relations

conclusion
The decline of successful wars of territorial aggrandizement during the
last half century is palpable. In fact, there has not been a case of successful
territorial aggrandizement since 1976. Furthermore, there have been important multilateral accords in support of the norm and frequent interventions by international organizations to force states to withdraw from
foreign countries.
Clearly, a central source of the norm has been the industrialized world’s
fear that territorial revisionism could ignite a major war that would
cause great human suffering. Several scholars have observed that this
revulsion against the imposition of physical pain has been central to the
strengthening of a variety of security and human rights regimes.65 The
experiences of the two world wars, a general understanding of territorial revisionism’s encouragement of major wars, and a fear of nuclear
weapons drove the development of the territorial integrity norm at key
points in its multilateral legitimization. But one cannot dismiss the ideational element of democratic values among Western, and an increasing
number of non-Western, countries. The Western democratic states were
the driving force behind the norm in 1919, 1945, and 1975. A recent
study on the CSCE highlights the impacts of democratic values on respect for interstate borders. According to Gregory Flynn and Henry
Farrell, these values orient states to the peaceful settlement of disputes
and respect for the territory and institutions of other countries.66 They
also stress that democratic countries place respect for states’ territorial
integrity before self-determination for ethnic communities because this
strategy best realizes their two values of self-governance and freedom from violence – or liberty and order. They note that ‘‘the norm of
[national] self-determination was not only subordinated to the norm of
inviolability of borders; it was also effectively removed as an independent principle of international relations in Europe separable from the
norm of democracy.’’67 In other words, for most Western liberals, selfdetermination means self-governance for the peoples of juridical territorial states.
Wars of territorial aggrandizement since 1945 have, for the most
part, concerned developing states’ dissatisfaction with the boundaries
65
66
67

Finnemore and Sikkink 1999, 267–68.
Flynn and Farrell 1999.
Flynn and Farrell 1999, 527 and passim. On the change in Western international
practices that flow from the application of liberal democratic values, see also Adler 1998.

The Territorial Integrity Norm

289

they inherited from the colonial powers; but these quarrels are largely
coming to an end. On the whole, what is remarkable is the degree of
support for the territorial order by developing countries. At the heart of
their support have been their fear of territorial aggrandizement based on
conflicting treaties, overlapping ethnic groups, and their military weakness; but the leverage of the Western states has also had a major impact
in assuring respect for the norm. If the Western states had not backed
the territorial status quo in the developing world, a good number of territorial aggressions would have succeeded, and the commitment of the developing states to the territorial integrity norm would have probably
declined markedly.
One should not discount the contribution of economic trends in the
strengthening of the territorial integrity norm, especially in recent decades. Of great import is the significance of a stable territorial order to
the operation of the increasingly interdependent international economy:
‘‘The globalizing economy requires the backing of territorially based state
power to enforce its rules.’’68 At the same time there is no indication that
economic discourses and economic motivations sustained the emergence
of the norm – especially in the wake of the two world wars. In fact, while
these economic trends have reduced states’ perceptions of benefits and
increased states’ perceptions of costs of territorial aggrandizement, they
do not account for why states are so strongly opposed to territorial
aggressions by other states.
There is not a simple answer to why the territorial integrity norm has
emerged as a central pillar of the international order. Different reasons were key for two major groupings of states, and the coincidence of
several factors seems to have been crucial to their backing. These key
factors have wrought a major change in the international territorial order.
Boundaries have not been frozen, but states have been effectively proscribed from altering them by force. The multistate political and security
order is clearly stronger than many political observers think in that the
society of states has largely eliminated what scholars have identified
as the major source of enduring rivalries and the frequency and intensity
of warfare.69
* * *
68
69

Cox 1996, 278.
See Holsti 1991; Goertz and Diehl 1992; Vasquez 1993; Huth 1996; and Hensel 1999.

part v
TREATY DESIGN AND DYNAMICS

13
Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?
Charles Lipson

‘‘Verbal contracts,’’ Samuel Goldwyn once said, ‘‘aren’t worth the paper
they’re written on.’’ Yet informal agreements and oral bargains suffuse
international affairs. They are the form that international cooperation takes
in a wide range of issues, from exchange rates to nuclear weapons. Take
monetary affairs, for instance. Except for the regional European Monetary
System, there have been no formal, comprehensive agreements on exchange
rates since the downfall of the Bretton Woods system in 1971. A prolonged
effort to resurrect the pegged-rate system failed, although new treaties were
drawn up and duly signed. Private financial markets simply overwhelmed
these official efforts, and central bankers eventually conceded the point. The
one comprehensive agreement since then, concluded in 1976 in Jamaica,
merely ratified a system of floating rates that had emerged unplanned. For
the past fifteen years, monetary arrangements have been a succession of
informal agreements of indefinite duration, most recently the Plaza
Communique´ and the Louvre Accord, designed to cope with volatile
currency movements.1 The Bretton Woods system itself depended on such
agreements in its declining years. It was held together by the tacit

For their comments and suggestions, I thank Ed Mansfield, David Spiro, Charles Kupchan,
Jack Snyder, and other participants in the Seminar on International Political Economy
at Columbia University. I am also grateful to Douglas Baird, Anne-Marie Burley, Dale
Copeland, Scott Leuning, Duncan Snidal, Stephen Walt, and other colleagues in the Program on International Politics, Economics, and Security (PIPES) at the University of Chicago.
1
See Yoichi Funabashi, Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre (Washington,
D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1988); and Peter B. Kenen, Managing
Exchange Rates (London: Routledge, 1988). Kenen reproduces key portions of the Plaza
Communique´ (22 September 1985) and the Louvre Accord (22 February 1987) on p. 50.

293

294

International Law and International Relations

agreement of European central banks not to convert their major dollar
holdings into gold. The system fell apart when Germany and France
abandoned that commitment. They did so because they believed that the
United States had abandoned its own (tacit) commitment to restrain
inflation and to avoid large current account deficits. Put another way, the
U.S. formal pledge to convert dollars into gold at $35 per ounce – the very
heart of the Bretton Woods system – was sustained only by silent
agreements that America would not be called upon to do so.2
Such informal agreements are vital in security relationships as well.
America’s relations with the Soviet Union have relied heavily on unspoken understandings. These tacit relationships are crucial for two reasons.
First, the Americans and Soviets *** made very few direct treaty commitments, and fewer still in key areas of national security. Second, for much
of the postwar period, each side was openly hostile to the other and outspoken in denying the value and even the legitimacy of cooperation. The
rhetoric went much further at times, challenging the adversary’s right to
govern at home, its basic security interests abroad, and its trustworthiness
in diplomatic dealings. For all that, the United States and Soviet Union
have generally framed their basic security policies in more prudent and
cautious terms. The U.S. decision to pursue containment rather than
‘‘rollback,’’ even at the height of Cold War tensions, was a tacit acknowledgment of the Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern Europe. When popular
uprisings broke out during the 1950s, the United States did nothing –
nothing to aid resistance movements in Germany, Poland, and Hungary
and nothing to deter their forcible suppression. *** Paul Keal has termed
such policies the ‘‘unspoken rules’’ of superpower diplomacy.3
2

3

See John Williamson, The Failure of World Monetary Reform, 1971–1974 (New York:
NewYork University Press, 1977); and Kenneth W. Dam, The Rules of the Game:
Reform and Evolution in the International Monetary System (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1982). For a counterargument focusing on U.S. domestic politics rather
than on the breakdown of international commitments, see Joanne Gowa, Closing the
Gold Window: Domestic Politics and the End of Bretton Woods (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1983).
See Paul Keal, Unspoken Rules and Superpower Dominance (London: Macmillan, 1983).
Some diplomatic efforts were made to articulate the rules, but they did little in themselves
to clarify expectations. In 1972, as the strategic arms limitation talks (SALT I) were
concluded, Nixon and Brezhnev signed the Basic Principles Agreement. It sought to
specify some key elements of the superpowers’ relationship and thereby facilitate the
development of detente. The product was vague and ambiguous. Worse, it seemed to
indicate – wrongly – U.S. agreement with the Soviet position on peaceful coexistence and
competition in other regions. Alexander George calls these elements ‘‘a pseudoagreement.’’ For the text of the agreement, see Department of State Bulletin, 26 June 1972,

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

295

Unspoken rules are not the only kinds of informal arrangements
between the superpowers. In the case of strategic arms limitations, both
the Americans and the Soviets publicly announced that they would
continue to observe the first SALT treaty after it expired in October
1977. The principal aim was to sustain a climate of cooperation while
SALT II was being negotiated. *** The unratified treaty was observed
informally even during the Reagan administration’s major arms buildup.
Both sides restricted specific categories of long-range nuclear weapons
to meet SALT II limitations, despite the absence of any formal agreement
to do so.
The Reagan administration always claimed that its nuclear policies
were unilateral and voluntary. Yet it devoted considerable attention to
possible Soviet ‘‘violations’’ of what was, after all, a nonexistent treaty.4
These violations were important because President Reagan always stated
that U.S. arms restraints depended on Soviet reciprocity and progress
toward a new arms treaty.5 Reagan repeatedly criticized the Soviets on
both counts but in practice continued to observe SALT limits until well
after the expiration date of the proposed treaty. The agreement was tacit,
but no less an agreement for that.

4

5

pp. 898–99. For an analysis, see Alexander George, ‘‘The Basic Principles Agreement of
1972,’’ in Alexander L. George, ed., Managing U.S.–Soviet Rivalry: Problems of Crisis
Prevention (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1983), pp. 107–18.
In 1984, in a confidential report to Congress, President Reagan cited in detail Soviet
noncompliance with numerous arms control agreements. Reagan’s accompanying message stated that ‘‘violations and probable violations have occurred with respect to
a number of Soviet legal obligations and political commitments in the arms control field.’’
SALT II violations were included, and the reference to ‘‘political commitments’’ alludes
to them. These criticisms were expanded in another report, issued in 1985. The Soviets
rejected these charges and made counterclaims regarding U.S. violations. Relevant
documents are cited by Notburga K. Calvo-Goller and Michael A. Calvo in The SALT
Agreements: Content-Application-Verification (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1987), pp. 318 and 326 ff.
President Reagan did restate the U.S. commitment not to undercut SALT II in June 1985,
some six months before the unratified treaty would have expired. U.S. policy, however, was always contingent on reciprocal Soviet adherence. On that point, Reagan was
sharply critical: ‘‘The United States has not taken any actions which would undercut
existing arms control agreements. The United States has fully kept its part of the bargain; however, the Soviets have not . . . . Certain Soviet violations are, by their very
nature, irreversible. Such is the case with respect to the Soviet Union’s flight-testing and
steps toward deployment of the SS-X-25 missile, a second new type of ICBM [intercontinental ballistic missile] prohibited by the unratified SALT II agreement. Since
the noncompliance associated with the development of this missile cannot be corrected
by the Soviet Union, the United States reserves the right to respond in a proportionate

296

International Law and International Relations

Informal accords among states and transnational actors are not
exceptional. The scale and the diversity of such accords indicate that
they are an important feature of world politics, not rare and peripheral.
The very informality of so many agreements illuminates basic features
of international politics. It highlights the continuing search for international cooperation, the profusion of forms it takes, and the serious
obstacles to more durable commitments.
All international agreements, whether formal or informal, are promises about future national behavior. To be considered genuine agreements, they must entail some reciprocal promises or actions, implying
future commitments. Agreements may be considered informal, to a greater
or lesser degree, if they lack the state’s fullest and most authoritative
imprimatur, which is given most clearly in treaty ratification.
The informality of agreements varies by degrees, along two principal
dimensions. The first is the government level at which the agreement is
made. A commitment made by the head of state (an executive agreement)
is the most visible and credible sign of policy intentions short of a ratified treaty. In important matters, commitments by lower-level bureaucracies are less effective in binding national policy. They are simply less
constraining on heads of state, senior political leaders, and other
branches of government, partly because they lack a visible impact on
national reputation. The second dimension is the form, or means, by
which an agreement is expressed. It may be outlined in an elaborate
written document, or it may involve a less formal exchange of notes, a
joint communique´, an oral bargain, or even a tacit bargain.6 Written
agreements allow greater attention to detail and more explicit consideration of the contingencies that might arise. They permit the parties to
set the boundaries of their promises, to control them more precisely, or
to create deliberate ambiguity and omissions on controversial matters.
At the other end of the spectrum – most informal of all – are oral and
tacit agreements. Their promises are generally more ambiguous and

6

manner at the appropriate time.’’ See the President’s statement of 10 June 1985, quoted
in Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, vol. 21, no. 24, 17 June 1985,
pp. 770–71.
It is worth noting that all of these distinctions are ignored in international law. Virtually
all international commitments, whether oral or written, whether made by the head of
state or a lower-level bureaucracy, are treated as ‘‘binding international commitments.’’
What is missing is not only the political dimension of these agreements, including their
status as domestic policy, but also any insight into why states choose more or less formal
means for their international agreements.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

297

less clearly delimited,7 and the very authority to make and execute them
may be in doubt.8 If disputes later arise, it is often difficult to specify
what was intended ex ante. Indeed, it may be difficult to show that there
was an agreement.9
The interpretive problems are even more acute with tacit understandings and implicit rules that are not well articulated between the
parties.10 Are these arrangements cooperative agreements at all? That
depends. They are not if they simply involve each actor’s best strategic
choice, given others’ independent choices. This Nash equilibrium may
produce order and predictability – that is, regular behavior and stable
7

8

9

10

Tacit and oral agreements, by their very nature, do not specify promises in great detail
and rarely spell out contingencies or remedies. Consider, for example, the informal
cooperation between friendly intelligence agencies such as the U.S. Central Intelligence
Agency and Israel’s Mossad. Besides exchanging information, both sides engage in
unacknowledged spying on each other. But what are the limits? What violates the
informal agreement, and what differentiates serious violations from ‘‘normal cheating’’?
To clarify these issues and to encourage regular cooperation, the United States and Israel
have signed informal accords, beginning with a secret agreement in 1951. Even so, such
agreements are necessarily incomplete, sometimes making it difficult to differentiate
cheating from permissible activity. *** See Wolf Blitzer, Territory of Lies: The Exclusive
Story of Jonathan Jay Pollard – The American Who Spied on His Country for Israel and
How He Was Betrayed (New York: Harper & Row, 1989), p. 163; and Dan Raviv and
Yossi Melman, Every Spy a Prince: The Complete History of Israel’s Intelligence
Community (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990), pp. 77 ff.
The State Department’s 1981 statement, for example, that the United States ‘‘would not
undercut’’ the unratified SALT II treaty if the Soviets reciprocated is an informal
commitment. To international lawyers, its status is clear-cut. The State Department has
unambiguously committed the United States by using the standard diplomatic language
of obligation to a treaty pending ratification. But what about the domestic political status
of that promise? The debate within the Reagan administration raged for another year
before the President publicly ratified the State Department position. Even then, the
Congress and courts need not be bound by these executive branch statements.
Recognizing these limitations on oral bargains, domestic courts refuse to recognize such
bargains in many cases, thereby creating a powerful incentive for written contracts. There
is no such incentive to avoid oral bargains in interstate agreements.
According to Downs and Rocke, ‘‘A state bargains tacitly with another state when it
attempts to manipulate the latter’s policy choices through its behavior rather than by
relying on formal or informal diplomatic exchange.’’ Actions, not diplomatic words, are
the crucial form of communications, and their aim is joint, voluntary cooperation rather
than outright coercion. Downs and Rocke’s contribution is to show how imperfect
information affects states’ strategic choices and may produce inadvertent arms races.
Their focus is on uncertain estimates of others’ strategies, preferences, and specific actions
(either completed or intended), and not on the ambiguous meaning of tacit agreements
and other informal bargains. See the following works of George W. Downs and David M.
Rocke: ‘‘Tacit Bargaining and Arms Control,’’ World Politics 39 (April 1987), p. 297; and
Tacit Bargaining, Arms Races, and Arms Control (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1990), p. 3.

298

International Law and International Relations

expectations – without cooperation.11 Genuine tacit cooperation involves
something more. It is based on shared expectations that each party can
improve its own outcome if its strategic choices are modified in expectation of reciprocal changes by others.12 Shared ‘‘understandings’’ can arise
in either case. They are not a unique marker of cooperative agreements.
What distinguishes cooperation, whether tacit or explicit, are the subtle
forms of mutual reliance and the possibilities of betrayal and regret.
The central point here is not taxonomic, presenting definitions of
tacit arrangements and other informal bargains simply to classify them.
The goal is to understand how different kinds of agreements can be used
to order international relationships. The means of international cooperation are frequently informal, and it is important to explore their rationale, uses, and limitations. At the same time, we should not mistake all
shared understandings for voluntary, informal bargains.
Informality is best understood as a device for minimizing the impediments to cooperation, at both the domestic and international levels.
What are the impediments? And what are the advantages of informal
agreements in addressing them? First, informal bargains are more flexible than treaties. They are willows, not oaks. They can be adapted to
meet uncertain conditions and unpredictable shocks. ‘‘One of the greatest
advantages of an informal instrument,’’ according to a legal counselor in
Britain’s Foreign Office, ‘‘is the ease with which it can be amended.’’13
Although treaties often contain clauses permitting renegotiation, the
process is slow and cumbersome and is nearly always impractical. This
point can be put in another, less obvious way: informal agreements make

11

12

13

See Jon Elster’s discussion of ‘‘the two problems of social order,’’ in The Cement of
Society: A Study of Social Order (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), chap.
1. Elster’s key distinction is between regular behavior patterns and cooperation. He
distinguishes five main varieties of cooperation: helping others, voluntarily bearing costs
of externalities, physical collaboration in joint ventures, mutual agreements to transfer
rights (private orderings), and conventional equilibria (in which no party can improve its
outcome by unilaterally deviating). In this article, my discussion of international
cooperation focuses only on reciprocal contractual exchanges, which involve future
performance and where the possibility of profitable defection might arise.
In tacit cooperation, one party in effect takes a chance in the expectation that another will
simultaneously take an equivalent chance, leaving both better off. Neither party takes
such chances when it maximizes unilaterally and independently. Stable expectations can
arise in either case, based upon stable Nash equilibria. It is important not to exaggerate
the scale of international cooperation by calling all shared expectations ‘‘cooperation.’’
They may be nothing more than unilateral maximizing.
Anthony Aust, ‘‘The Theory and Practice of Informal International Instruments,’’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly 35 (October 1986), p. 791.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

299

fewer informational demands on the parties. Negotiators need not try
to predict all future states and comprehensively contract for them. Second, because informal arrangements do not require elaborate ratification,
they can be concluded and implemented quickly if need be. In complex,
rapidly changing environments, speed is a particular advantage.
Finally, informal agreements are generally less public and prominent,
even when they are not secret. This lower profile has important consequences for democratic oversight, bureaucratic control, and diplomatic
precedent. Informal agreements can escape the public controversies of
a ratification debate. They can avoid the disclosures, unilateral ‘‘understandings,’’ and amendments that sometimes arise in that open process.
Because of their lower profile, they are also more tightly controlled by the
government bureaucracies that negotiate and implement the agreements
and less exposed to intrusion by other agencies. Agencies dealing with
specific international issues, such as environmental pollution or foreign
intelligence, can use informal agreements to seal quiet bargains with their
foreign counterparts, avoiding close scrutiny and active involvement by
other government agencies with different agendas.
The lower profile and the absence of formal national commitment
also mean that informal agreements are less constraining as diplomatic
precedents. They do not stand as visible and general policy commitments,
as treaties so often do. In all these ways, the most sensitive and embarrassing implications of an agreement can remain nebulous or unstated for
both domestic and international audiences, or even hidden from them.
Yet all of these diplomatic benefits come at a price, and sometimes
a very high one. The flexibility of informal agreements also means that
they are more easily abandoned. Avoiding public debates conceals the
depth of national support for an agreement. Ratification debates can also
serve to mobilize and integrate the multiple constituencies interested in
an agreement. These policy networks of public officials (executive, legislative, and bureaucratic) and private actors sustain agreements during
the implementation stage. Joint communique´s and executive agreements
sidestep these basic democratic processes. This evasion typically means
that the final agreements are less reliable for all participants.
These costs and benefits suggest the basic reasons for choosing informal agreements:
(1) the desire to avoid formal and visible pledges,
(2) the desire to avoid ratification,
(3) the ability to renegotiate or modify as circumstances change, or

300

International Law and International Relations

(4) the need to reach agreements quickly.
Because speed, simplicity, flexibility, and privacy are all common
diplomatic requirements, we would expect to find informal agreements
used frequently. Because the associated costs and benefits vary in different circumstances, we would also expect to find a distinct pattern of formal and informal agreements. Finally, we would expect to find various
types of informal agreements used to meet particular needs.
This article examines the strengths and weaknesses of informal agreements. It is an inquiry into the neglected institutional constraints on international cooperation – and the imperfect devices to overcome them. It
considers the basic choices between treaties and informal instruments, as well
as the choices among different kinds of informal arrangements, all of which
can be used to express cooperation among states. Finally, it asks what these
varied forms of cooperation can tell us about the more general impediments
to international agreement. The aim here is to use the choice of forms of
agreement to explore some problems of rational cooperation in international affairs and particularly their contextual and institutional dimensions.

self-help and the limits of international agreement
When states cooperate, they can choose from a wide variety of forms to
express their commitments, obligations, and expectations. The most formal
are bilateral and multilateral treaties, in which states acknowledge their
promises as binding commitments with full international legal status. At
the other extreme are tacit agreements, in which obligations and commitments are implied or inferred but not openly declared, and oral agreements,
in which bargains are expressly stated but not documented. In between lie a
variety of written instruments to express national obligations with greater
precision and openness than tacit or oral agreements but without the full
ratification and national pledges that accompany formal treaties. These
informal arrangements range from executive agreements and nonbinding
treaties to joint declarations, final communique´s, agreed minutes, memoranda of understanding, and agreements pursuant to legislation. Unlike
treaties, these informal agreements generally come into effect without
ratification and do not require international publication or registration.
Although these agreements differ in form and political intent, legal
scholars rarely distinguish among them. The dominant view is that
international agreements, whatever their title, are legally binding upon
the signatories, unless clearly stated otherwise. Thus, informal agreements,

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

301

if they contain explicit promises, are conflated with treaties. They are
rarely studied directly, except for the curiosity of ‘‘nonbinding’’ agreements such as the Helsinki Final Act.14
This distinction between agreements that legally bind and agreements
that do not is a traditional one. It is central to the technical definition of
treaties codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Article
26 states that treaties are ‘‘binding upon the parties’’ and ‘‘must be performed by them in good faith.’’15 Similarly, texts on international law
emphasize the binding nature of treaties and, indeed, a wide range of
other international agreements.16
The implicit claim is that international agreements have a status similar
to domestic contracts, which are binding and enforceable. This claim is
seriously misleading. It is a faulty and legalistic characterization of international agreements in practice and is also a poor guide to why states sometimes use treaties and other times use informal means to express agreements.
Although international agreements are contracted commitments, any simple
analogy to domestic contracts is mistaken for several reasons. First, in
domestic legal systems, binding agreements are adjudicated and enforced
by courts, backed by the instruments of state power. *** Courts can hold
parties responsible for their promises, whether those promises were
originally intended as contracts or not, and can settle their meaning.17
When parties discuss compliance after agreements have been signed,
they bargain in the shadow of law and judicial enforcement.
14

15

16

17

See, for example, Oscar Schachter, ‘‘The Twilight Existence of Nonbinding International
Agreements,’’ American Journal of International Law 71 (April 1977), pp. 296–304;
Michael J. Glennon, ‘‘The Senate Role in Treaty Ratification,’’ American Journal of
International Law 77 (April 1983), pp. 257–80; and Fritz Mu¨nch, ‘‘Non-Binding
Agreements,’’ in The Encyclopedia of Public International Law, vol. 7 (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1984), pp. 353–57. The one general (and quite valuable) legal treatment
of informal agreements is ‘‘The Theory and Practice of Informal International Instruments’’ by Anthony Aust, a practitioner in the British Foreign Office.
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties was opened for signature on 23 May
1969 and entered into force on 27 January 1980, after ratification by thirty-five nations.
See UN document A/CONF. 39/27, 1969.
See, for example, Lord McNair, The Law of Treaties (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961); and
Taslim Elias, The Modern Law of Treaties (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 1974).
For a system of contract law to be effective, the parties cannot simply abandon their
commitments unilaterally. Or, rather, they cannot abandon these commitments without
facing legal penalties. Reflecting this understanding, the key disputes in contract law
revolve around what constitutes a binding agreement and what constitutes an appropriate penalty for nonperformance. International legal scholarship largely avoids these
fundamental issues, and it says all too little about related issues of renunciation, violation, and monitoring of agreements.

302

International Law and International Relations

Whether the issue involves simple promises or complicated commercial transactions, the availability of effective, compulsory arbitration by
courts supports and facilitates agreements. It does so, in the last resort, by
compelling adherence to promises privately made or, more commonly,
by requiring compensatory payment for promises broken.18 Moreover,
the prospect of such enforcement colors out-of-court bargaining.
* * *
There is no debate over the propriety of these judicial functions. They
are crucial in complex capitalist economies in which independent agents
work together by voluntary agreement. What legal scholars debate is not
the propriety of enforcement power but its substantive content and the
underlying principles that should govern damage awards when promises
are broken.19 ***
Whatever the standard for damages, it is clear that the courts offer
political backing for the exchange of promises and, indeed, for the institution of promising in all its facets. Their role provides an important
measure of protection to those who receive promises. It diminishes the
tasks of self-protection, lowers the costs of transactions, and thereby promotes contractual agreements and exchange in general.
To lower the burdens of self-protection is not to eliminate them
entirely. Using local courts to sustain agreements is often costly or impractical. The enforcement of contractual rights and obligations is imperfect. These costs and uncertainties raise the possibility that breaches
of contract will go uncompensated or undercompensated. Knowing
that, the parties must look to themselves for some protection against
18

19

This backing for promises is qualified in at least two senses. First, it leaves aside the
expense and opportunity costs of using the courts (some of which may be recovered in
the final judgment). Second, it assumes that the contested promises can somehow be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of a third party. For oral promises, this may be a difficult
hurdle, as Goldwyn noted.
Fried and Atiyah represent opposite poles in this debate. Fried argues that the
common law of contracts is based on the moral institution of promising, rather than
on commercial exchange. To sustain this institution, the recipients of broken promises
should be awarded their expectations of profit. Atiyah argues that court decisions have
moved away from this strict emphasis, which arose in the nineteenth century, and
returned to an older notion of commercial practice, which limits awards to the costs
incurred in relying on broken promises. See Charles Fried, Contract as Promise: A
Theory of Contractual Obligation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981);
Patrick S. Atiyah, From Principles to Pragmatism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978); and
Patrick S. Atiyah, The Rise and Fall of Freedom of Contract (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1979).

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

303

opportunism.20 It is also true that domestic courts do not become involved in contract disputes through their own independent initiatives.
They are called upon by parties to the dispute – at the parties’ own initiative, at their own cost, and at their own risk. In that sense, access to
the courts may be seen as an adjunct to other forms of self-help. Like
these other forms, it is costly and the results uncertain.
But the fact that self-help is common to all agreements does not
eradicate the fundamental differences between domestic and international
bargains. Hanging over domestic bargains is the prospect of judicial interpretation and enforcement, whether the disputes are settled in court
or not.21 There is simply no analogue for these functions in international
agreements. Of course, the parties to an interstate dispute may, by mutual
consent, seek judicial rulings or private arbitration. In multilateral
treaties, states may also agree in advance to use procedures for dispute
resolution.22 These procedures may have teeth. They can raise the diplomatic costs of violations and ease the burdens of retaliation. But the
punishments are also highly circumscribed. For the most part, they simply define and justify certain limited acts of self-enforcement or retaliation. At most, they may force a violator to withdraw from an agreement
or a multilateral organization, giving up the benefits of participation.23
20

21

22

23

The courts themselves require some efforts at self-protection. Once a contract has been
breached, for instance, the ‘‘innocent’’ party is expected to take reasonable actions to
minimize the damages and cannot win awards that cover a failure to do so. For the
efficiency implications of this legal doctrine, see Anthony Kronman and Richard Posner,
The Economics of Contract Law (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979), pp. 160–61.
See Robert H. Mnookin and Lewis Kornhauser, ‘‘Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law:
The Case of Divorce,’’ Yale Law Journal 88 (April 1979), pp. 950–97. Mnookin and
Kornhauser also conclude that the impact of differing legal arrangements on divorce
settlements cannot be specified with precision. They attribute that to a more general
theoretical gap: a limited understanding of how alternative institutional arrangements
can affect bargaining outcomes.
These are often ad hoc procedures designed for a specific agreement. Their powers may
be quasi-judicial, as in the dispute mechanisms of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT), or merely consultative, as in the procedures of the U.S.–Soviet
Standing Consultative Commission, established in SALT I and SALT II. The presence of
quasi-judicial bodies attached to specific agreements indicates, once again, the limits of
international adjudication. And it points to the ad hoc means devised to manage the risks
of international cooperation. See Richard B. Bilder, Managing the Risks of International
Agreement (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1981), pp. 56–61.
A signatory always has the practical option of withdrawal, whether it is included as
a legal option in the treaty or not. For legal analyses, see Arie E. David, The Strategy of
Treaty Termination: Lawful Breaches and Retaliations (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1975), pp. 203–16; and Herbert W. Briggs, ‘‘Unilateral Denunciation
of Treaties: The Vienna Convention and the International Court of Justice,’’ American
Journal of International Law 68 (January 1974), pp. 51–68.

304

International Law and International Relations

That can be punishment, to be sure, but it falls far short of the legal
sanctions for violating domestic contracts. There, the rights of withdrawal are accompanied by external enforcement of damages, usually
based on disappointed expectations of profit. The fact that all agreements
contain some elements of self-protection and some institutions for private
governance should not obscure these basic differences between domestic
and international bargains.24
Domestic legal systems not only aid in enforcing contracts but also set
effective boundaries on the scope and nature of private agreements.
Statutes and court rulings limit the private, voluntary ordering of relationships. A significant portion of criminal law, for example, is devoted
specifically to punishing certain categories of private agreements, from
prostitution and gambling to the sale of illicit drugs. The rationale is
that larger public purposes should override the immediate parties’ own
desires: their bargains should be barred or constrained. Civil laws governing rent control, usury, insider trading, cartel price-fixing, homosexual
marriage, and indentured servitude are all directed at preventing private bargains, for better or for worse.25 Such restrictions and the rules
governing them are central elements of domestic legal systems.
Similarly, the law can restrict the form of agreements. One clear-cut and
prominent example is the U.S. Statute of Frauds, which requires that
certain agreements be put in writing. ***
Again, there are simply no equivalent restrictions on either the form
or substance of international agreements. The domain of permissible
international agreements is simply the domain of possible agreements.26
24

25

26

There have been proposals, based on efficiency grounds or libertarian principles, that
private agents play a much larger role in enforcing domestic laws and contracts and that
they be compensated by bounties, paid either by violators or the state. These proposals
cannot be applied to international agreements without significant modification, since
they ultimately envision authoritative judicial interpretation and enforcement. See Gary
S. Becker and George J. Stigler, ‘‘Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and Compensation of
Enforcers,’’ Journal of Legal Studies 3 (January 1974), pp. 1–18; Gary S. Becker, ‘‘Crime
and Punishment: An Economic Approach,’’ Journal of Political Economy 76 (March–
April 1968), pp. 169–217; and George J. Stigler, ‘‘The Optimum Enforcement of Laws’’
Journal of Political Economy 78 (May–June 1970), pp. 526–36.
As Mnookin and Kornhauser point out in their study of divorce laws, ‘‘A legal system
might allow varying degrees of private ordering upon dissolution of the marriage. Until
recently, divorce law attempted to restrict private ordering severely.’’ See Mnookin and
Kornhauser, ‘‘Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law,’’ pp. 952–53.
There is one restriction worth noting on the legal form of international agreements. The
World Court will only consider agreements that have been formally registered with the
United Nations. If the World Court were a powerful enforcement body, this restriction
would influence the form of major agreements.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

305

This absence of restraint is not due simply to the lack of an international legislature and executive (though surely they are absent). It is due
equally to the absence of an effective system of adjudication. One major
limitation on prohibited domestic bargains, aside from any direct penalties, is that illicit bargains are not enforced by courts. This restricts such
bargains by making them more costly to execute. To implement illegal
contracts requires special precautions and sometimes entails the establishment of a broader set of institutional arrangements: a criminal enterprise.27
These high costs of self-enforcement and the dangers of opportunism are important obstacles to extralegal agreements. Indeed, the costs
may be prohibitive if they leave unsolved such basic problems as moral
hazard and time inconsistency. The same obstacles are inherent features
of interstate bargaining and must be resolved if agreements are to be
concluded and carried out. Resolving them depends on the parties’
preference orderings, the transparency of their preferences and choices
(asymmetrical information), and the private institutional mechanisms set
up to secure their bargains.28 It has little to do, however, with whether an
international agreement is considered ‘‘legally binding’’ or not. In domestic affairs, on the other hand, these legal boundaries make an enormous
difference – the difference between selling contraband whiskey in Al
Capone’s Chicago and selling the same product legally ten years later.
In international affairs, then, the term ‘‘binding agreement’’ is a misleading hyperbole. To enforce their bargains, states must act for themselves. This limitation is crucial: it is a recognition that international
politics is a realm of contesting sovereign powers. For that reason, it is
misleading to understand treaties (as international lawyers typically do)
in purely formal, legal terms, as instruments that somehow bind states to
their promises. It is quite true that treaties incorporate the language of
formal obligation, chiefly phrases such as ‘‘we shall’’ and ‘‘we undertake,’’
together with specific commitments. Such conventional diplomatic language is a defining feature of modern treaties. But that language cannot
accomplish its ambitious task of binding states to their promises. This
27

28

Criminal organizations such as the Mafia can be understood partly as an institutional
response to the problems of providing criminal services when the bargains themselves
are illegal. For a fascinating economic study of such institutional arrangements, see
Peter Reuter, Disorganized Crime: Illegal Markets and the Mafia (Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1983).
On the mechanisms of private governance, see Oliver R. Williamson, The Economic
Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting (New York: Free
Press, 1985).

306

International Law and International Relations

inability is an inherent limitation on bargaining for international cooperation. It means that treaties, like all international agreements, must
be enforced endogenously.

what do treaties do?
If treaties do not truly bind, why do states use that language? Why frame
agreements in that form? The chief reason, I think, is that states wish to
signal their intentions with special intensity and gravity and are using
a well-understood form to do so. The decision to encode a bargain in
treaty form is primarily a decision to highlight the importance of the
agreement and, even more, to underscore the durability and significance
of the underlying promises. The language of ‘‘binding commitments,’’ in
other words, is a diplomatic communication aimed at other signatories
and, often, at third parties. In the absence of international institutions that
permit effective self-binding or offer external guarantees for promises,
treaties use conventional forms to signify a seriousness of commitment.
By making that commitment both solemn and public, the parties indicate
their intention, at least, to adhere to a particular bargain.
The effect of treaties, then, is to raise the political costs of noncompliance. That cost is raised not only for others but also for oneself. The
more formal and public the agreement, the higher the reputational costs
of noncompliance. The costs are highest when the agreement contains
specific written promises, made publicly by senior officials with the state’s
fullest imprimatur. States deliberately choose to impose these costs on
themselves in order to benefit from the counterpromises (or actions) of
others. Given the inherent constraints of international institutions, these
formal pledges are as close as states can come to precommitment – to
a contractual exchange of promises. In short, one crucial element of
treaties is that they visibly stake the parties’ reputations to their pledges.29
The loss of credibility (because of deliberate violations) is a real loss,
although it is certainly not always a decisive one, in terms of policy
29

If a state already has a poor reputation for keeping its promises, then it risks little in
staking that reputation on other agreements, and its pledges will fail to convince future
partners without special efforts (such as bonds, hostages, or collateral) and careful
monitoring, all designed to minimize reliance on ‘‘trust.’’ That does not rule out treaties,
but it suggests that they may be disingenuous and cannot be relied upon. Stalin and Hitler,
for example, found their pact useful because it produced immediate gains for each: the
division of Eastern Europe. The incorporation of the new territories also postponed a
confrontation between the two. The pact was useful for these immediate and simultaneous gains, not for any future promises of cooperation it held out.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

307

calculus.30 Informal agreements are generally less reliable and convincing
precisely because they involve less of a reputational stake.31 The stakes
are diminished either because the agreements are less public (the audience
is narrower and more specialized) or because high-level officials are less
directly involved.
In a world of imperfect information, where others’ current and future preferences cannot be known with certainty, reputation has value.
As a result, it can be used as a ‘‘hostage’’ or bond to support contracts.
Because breaking a contract or even appearing to do so degrades reputation, it produces a loss of reputational capital. The threat of such loss
promotes compliance, although it cannot guarantee it. Whether it succeeds depends on (1) the immediate gains from breaking an agreement,
(2) the lost stream of future benefits and the rate of discount applied to that
stream, and (3) the expected costs to reputation from specific violations.32
Not all violations discredit equally.33 First, not all are witnessed.
Some that are seen may be considered justifiable or excusable, perhaps
because others have already violated the agreement, because circumstances have changed significantly, because compliance is no longer feasible, or because the contracted terms appear ambiguous. Thus, memory,
inference, and context – social learning and constructed meaning – all
matter. Second, not all actors have a reputation worth preserving. Some
simply do not have much to lose, whether their violations are visible or
not. Moreover, they may not choose to invest in reputation, presumably
because the costs of building a good name outweigh the incremental

30

31
32

33

Of course, commitments may be cast aside, no matter how formal, as Saddam Hussein
did when he declared Iraq’s border agreement with Iran ‘‘null and void’’ in 1981. The
agreement, reached in 1975 in Algiers, stated that ‘‘land and river frontiers shall be
inviolable, permanent and final.’’ There is a cost to discarding such an agreement
unilaterally, even if that cost seems remote at the time. It virtually rules out the ability to
conclude useful agreements on other border disputes. See United Nations, Yearbook of
the United Nations, 1981, vol. 35 (New York: United Nations, 1985), pp. 238–39. See
also Iran, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Legal Department, A Review of the Imposed War
(Tehran: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 1983), including the text of the 1975 treaty, the
treaty addendum, and Iran’s interpretation.
In this sense, secret treaties are similar to informal agreements.
In other words, if the future is highly valued, there can be an equilibrium in which the
(current discounted) value of a reputation exceeds any short-run gains from taking
advantage of it. If the prospective gains from reputation are sufficiently large, then it also
pays to invest in reputation. See David M. Kreps, A Course in Microeconomic Theory
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990), p. 532.
J. Mark Ramseyer, ‘‘Legal Rules in Repeated Deals: Banking in the Shadow of Defection
in Japan,’’ Journal of Legal Studies 20 (January 1991), p. 96.

308

International Law and International Relations

stream of rewards.34 Sovereign debtors, for example, value their reputation least when they do not expect to borrow again.35 Alternatively,
actors with poor reputations (or little track record) may choose to invest in them precisely to create expectations about future performance. If these expectations can produce a stream of rewards and if the
future is highly valued, it may be rational to make such investments.36
Thus, the value of reputation lost depends on the visibility and clarity
of both promises and performance, on the value of an actor’s prior
reputation, and on the perceived usefulness of reputation in supporting
other agreements.
Compliance with treaties, as I have noted, is specifically designed
to be a salient issue, supported by reputation. Unfortunately, the hostage of reputation is not always strong support. Some states foresee
little gain from enhanced reputation, either because the immediate costs
are too high or the ongoing rewards are too little, too late. They may
sign treaties cynically, knowing that they can violate them cheaply.
Others may sign treaties in good faith but simply abandon them if
their calculations about future rewards change. Finally, some states may
invest heavily to demonstrate the credibility of their promises, to show
that they are reliable partners, unswayed by short-term gains from defection.37 The general importance of reputation, in other words, does not
eliminate the problem of multiple equilibria. Just as there can be economic markets with some sellers of high-quality goods and some sellers of
34

35

36

37

Again, the shadow of the future is crucial. If future rewards are sharply discounted,
then it pays to exploit prior reputation (to disinvest) to reap short-term rewards.
Elsewhere, I have shown that sovereign debtors in the nineteenth century moved to
settle their old defaults when they contemplated seeking new loans. Creditors had the
greatest bargaining leverage at precisely these moments. See Charles Lipson, Standing
Guard: Protecting Foreign Capital in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985), p. 47. See also
Carlos Marichal, A Century of Debt Crises in Latin America: From Independence
to the Great Depression, 1820–1930 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989),
pp. 122–23.
The short-term price of reputation may either be foregone opportunities or direct
expenditures, such as fixed investments that are most valuable within a specific bilateral
relationship. Williamson has explored the use of such fixed investments to make credible
commitments in The Economic Institutions of Capitalism.
The United States made such an investment in reputation in the late 1970s, after its
credibility as leader of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was damaged by
the neutron bomb affair. The problem arose after the Carter administration first
supported and then opposed NATO’s deployment of new antitank weapons, equipped
with enhanced radiation warheads or neutron bombs. Key European leaders had already
declared their support publicly, at considerable political cost, and now they had to reverse

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

309

shoddy goods, both of them rational, there can be diplomatic environments in which some states are reliable treaty partners and some are not.38
Reputation, then, can contribute to treaty self-enforcement if not
ensure it. Self-enforcement simply means that an agreement remains in
force because, at any given moment, each party believes it gains more
by sustaining the agreement than by terminating it. That calculation
includes all future benefits and costs, appropriately discounted to give
their present value.39 Enhancing a reputation for reliability is one such
benefit. It is of particular value to governments engaged in a range of
international transactions requiring trust and mutual reliance. Of course,
other costs and benefits may outweigh these reputational issues.40 The
key point, however, is that reputation can be used to support international cooperation and has important implications for its form. The
choice of a formal, visible document such as a treaty magnifies the reputational effects of adherence and buttresses self-enforcement.
Nations still can and do break even their most formal and solemn
commitments to other states. Indeed, the unscrupulous may use treaty

38

39

40

course. After the crisis died down, the Carter administration proposed another approach
to nuclear modernization: Pershing II missiles. The administration then held fast (as did
the Reagan administration) in support of its new plan. It did so despite a rising tide of
public protest abroad and wavering support from European leaders, especially the
Germans, who had initially proposed the modernization. According to Garthoff, ‘‘The
principal effect of the neutron weapon affair was to reduce Western confidence in
American leadership in the alliance, and later to lead the United States to seek to undo
that effect by another new arms initiative for NATO . . . The Carter administration itself
felt it needed to compensate for its handling of the neutron decision. It sought to do so by
responding boldly to a perceived European concern through exercising vigorous leadership . . . . Doubts about the military necessity or even desirability of deploying new
[long-range tactical nuclear force] systems were overwhelmed by a perceived political
necessity within the alliance.’’ See Raymond L. Garthoff, Detente and Confrontation:
American–Soviet Relations from Nixon to Reagan (Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 1985), pp. 853 and 859.
Firms can guarantee quality by offering warranties. But what guarantees the warranty?
The answer for expensive items may be the threat of litigation. But for less expensive
items, it is simply the firm’s reputation. ‘‘The hostage for performance,’’ according to
Rubin, ‘‘must be in the familiar form of a quasirent stream [either of profits or return on
capital]. In either case, the price of the product must be above marginal cost, and the
difference must be high enough so that cheating by the firm does not pay.’’ See Paul
Rubin, Managing Business Transactions: Controlling the Cost of Coordinating, Communicating, and Decision Making (New York: Free Press, 1990), p. 147.
L. G. Telser, ‘‘A Theory of Self-Enforcing Agreements,’’ Journal of Business 53 (January
1980), pp. 27–28.
Thus, a single agreement can be self-enforcing, even if it is divorced from any reputational
concerns. Conversely, even when reputational issues are salient, a treaty may break down
if other costs are more important.

310

International Law and International Relations

commitments as a way of deceiving unwary partners, deliberately creating false expectations or simply cheating when the opportunity arises.
(Informal agreements are less susceptible to these dangers. They raise
expectations less than treaties and so are less likely to dupe the naive.)
But states pay a serious price for acting in bad faith and, more generally, for renouncing their commitments. This price comes not so much
from adverse judicial decisions at The Hague but from the decline in
national reputation as a reliable partner, which impedes future agreements.41 Indeed, opinions of the World Court gain much of their significance by reinforcing these costs to national reputation.
Put simply, treaties are a conventional way of raising the credibility of
promises by staking national reputation on adherence. The price of noncompliance takes several forms. First, there is loss of reputation as a
reliable partner. A reputation for reliability is important in reaching other
cooperative agreements where there is some uncertainty about compliance.42 Second, the violation or perceived violation of a treaty may give
rise to specific, costly retaliation, ranging from simple withdrawal of
cooperation in one area to broader forms of noncooperation and specific
sanctions. Some formal agreements, such as the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), even establish a limited set of permissible responses to violations, although most treaties do not. Finally, treaty violations may recast national reputation in a still broader and more dramatic
way, depicting a nation that is not only untrustworthy but is also a deceitful enemy, one that makes promises in order to deceive.
This logic also suggests circumstances in which treaties – and, indeed,
all international agreements – ought to be most vulnerable. An actor’s
reputation for reliability has a value over time. The present value of that
reputation is the discounted stream of these current and future benefits. When time horizons are long, even distant benefits are considered
valuable now. When horizons are short, these future benefits are worth
little,43 while the gains from breaking an agreement are likely to be more
41

42

43

A poor reputation impedes a state’s future agreements because the state cannot use its
reputation as a credible and valuable ‘‘performance bond.’’
‘‘Reputation commands a price (or exacts a penalty),’’ Stigler once observed, ‘‘because
it economizes on search.’’ When that search must cover unknown future behavior, such
as a partner’s likelihood of complying with an agreement, then reputations are
particularly valuable. See George Stigler, ‘‘The Economics of Information,’’ Journal of
Political Economy 69 (June 1961), p. 224.
This discount rate refers only to the present value of known future benefits. It assumes
perfect information about future payoffs. Greater risk or uncertainty about future
benefits can also affect their present value.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

311

immediate and tangible. Thus, under pressing circumstances, such as
the looming prospect of war or economic crisis, the long-term value of a
reputation for reliability will be sharply discounted. As a consequence,
adherence to agreements must be considered less profitable and therefore less reliable.44 This points to a striking paradox of treaties: they are
often used to seal partnerships for vital actions, such as war, but they
are weakest at precisely that moment because the present looms larger
and the future is more heavily discounted.45
This weakness is sometimes recognized, though rarely emphasized,
in studies of international law. It has no place at all, however, in the law of
treaties. All treaties are treated equally, as legally binding commitments,
and typically lumped together with a wide range of informal bargains.
Treaties that declare alliances, establish neutral territories, or announce
broad policy guidelines are not classified separately. Their legal status is the
same as that of any other treaty. Yet it is also understood, by diplomats and
jurists alike, that these three types of treaty are especially vulnerable to
violation or renunciation. For this reason, Richard Baxter has characterized them as ‘‘soft’’ or ‘‘weak’’ law, noting that ‘‘if a State refuses to come to
the aid of another under the terms of an alliance, nothing can force it to. It
was never expected that the treaty would be ‘enforced.’ ’’46
* * *
The real point is to understand how *** perceptions of mutual
advantage can support various kinds of international cooperation and
how different legal forms, such as treaties, fit into this essentially political

44

45

46

This logic should apply to all agreements lacking effective third-party enforcement,
from modern warfare to premodern commerce. For an application of this approach to
medieval economic history, see John M. Veitch, ‘‘Repudiations and Confiscations by the
Medieval State,’’ Journal of Economic History 46 (March 1986), pp. 31–36.
Of course, states often do go to war alongside their long-time allies. My point is that if
the costs are high (relative to longer-term reputational issues), their decision will be
guided largely by their calculus of short-term gains and losses. That determination is
largely independent of alliance agreements and formal treaties of mutual support.
Knowing that, states facing war are reluctant to count too heavily on prior commitments,
however formal or sincere, by alliance partners. By the same token, opponents have
considerable incentives to design coalition-splitting strategies by varying the immediate
costs and stakes to individual coalition members. This debate over long-term reputation
versus short-term costs figured prominently in the British cabinet’s debate over commitments to France before World War I.
See Baxter, ‘‘International Law in ‘Her Infinite Variety,’ ’’ p. 550. See also Ignaz SeidlHohenfeldern, ‘‘International Economic Soft Law,’’ Recueil de cours (Collected Courses
of the Hague Academy of International Law), vol. 163, 1979, pp. 169–246.

312

International Law and International Relations

dynamic. The environment of contesting sovereign powers does not
mean, as realist theories of international politics would have it, that
cooperation is largely irrelevant or limited to common cause against
military foes.47 Nor does it mean that conflict and the resources for it are
always dominant in international affairs. It does mean, however, that the
bases for cooperation are decentralized and often fragile. Unfortunately,
neither the language of treaties nor their putative legal status can
transcend these limitations.

rationales for informal agreements
Speed and Obscurity
What we have concentrated on thus far are the fundamental problems
of international agreements. Treaties, like less formal instruments, are
plagued by difficulties of noncompliance and self-enforcement. These
potential problems limit agreements when monitoring is difficult, enforcement is costly, and expected gains from noncompliance are immediate and significant. The traditional legal view that treaties are valuable
because they are binding is inadequate precisely because it fails to
comprehend these basic and recurrent problems.
To understand the choice between treaties and informal agreements,
however, we need to move beyond the generic problems of monitoring,
betrayal, and self-enforcement. Imperfect information and incentives
to defect apply to all kinds of international bargains; they do not
explain why some are framed as joint declarations and some as treaties.
We therefore need to consider more specific properties of informal
and formal agreements, along with their particular advantages and
limitations.
To begin with, treaties are the most serious and deliberate form of
international agreement and are often the most detailed. As such, they
47

Realists consider cooperation important in only one sphere: military alliances. ‘‘In
anarchy, states form alliances to protect themselves,’’ says Walt. ‘‘Their conduct is
determined by the threats they perceive.’’ Although such alliances are important, they are
simply considered the by-products of a world fundamentally characterized by conflict
and the contest for relative gains. As Grieco bluntly puts it, ‘‘States are predisposed
toward conflict and competition, and they often fail to cooperate even when they have
common interests.’’ See Stephen M. Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1987), p. x; and Joseph M. Grieco, Cooperation Among Nations:
Europe, America, and Non-Tariff Barriers to Trade (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1990), p. 4.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

313

are the slowest to complete.48 After the diplomats have finally left the
table, the agreement must still win final approval from the signatories.
That usually means a slow passage through the full domestic process of
ratification. The process naturally differs from country to country, but in
complex governments, and especially in democracies with some shared
powers, gaining assent can be time-consuming.49 If the executive lacks a
secure governing majority or if the legislature has significant powers of
oversight, it can take months. It also opens the agreement and the silent
calculus behind it to public scrutiny and time-consuming debate.
For controversial treaties, such as the ones ceding U.S. control over
the Panama Canal, ratification can be very slow and painful indeed. ***
Even when agreements are much less contentious, the machinery of
ratification can grind slowly.50 ***
It is little wonder, then, that governments prefer simpler, more convenient instruments. It is plain, too, that executives prefer instruments that
they can control unambiguously, without legislative advice or consent. But
there are important domestic constraints, some rooted in constitutional
prerogatives, some in legal precedent, and some in the shifting balance
of domestic power. To cede control of the Panama Canal, for instance,
the President had no choice but to use a treaty. His authority to conduct

48

49

50

Adelman emphasizes the slowness of negotiating formal agreements, especially major
agreements with the Soviets. The Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963) took eight years to
complete; the Non-Proliferation Treaty (1968) took more than three years; and the
SALT I agreement (1972) took more than two years. The SALT II agreement (1979)
took seven years and still failed to win Senate ratification. See Kenneth Adelman,
‘‘Arms Control With and Without Agreements,’’ Foreign Affairs 63 (Winter 1984–85),
pp. 240–63.
The slowness and difficulty of ratifying complex agreements and the problems of
adapting to meet changing circumstances often lead states to choose less formal
mechanisms. The United States and European Community (EC) have made exactly
that choice to deal with their conflicts over ‘‘competition policy’’ and antitrust. The
two sides ‘‘have abandoned the idea of drawing up a special treaty on competition
issues,’’ such as mergers and acquisitions, according to the Financial Times, ‘‘because it
would be too complicated, and would involve obtaining the approval of both the U.S.
congress and EC member states. Instead, they discussed more flexible arrangements
providing for a better exchange of information, regular meetings and discussions on
current cases, and a means of settling disputes.’’ See Financial Times, 17 January 1991,
p. 6.
See ‘‘Treaty on Extradition and Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Between the
United States of America and the Republic of Turkey, with Appendix, Signed June 7,
1979, Entered into Force January 1, 1981,’’ in United States Treaties and Other
International Agreements, vol. 32, part 3 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1986), pp. 3111 ff.

314

International Law and International Relations

foreign affairs is broad, but not broad enough to hand over the canal
and surrounding territory to Panama without Senate approval.51 ***
Aside from extradition, which bears directly on the civil rights of
accused criminals, the courts rarely affect the form of international
agreements. That is true even for U.S. courts, which are normally quite
willing to review political decisions. They try to avoid direct involvement
in foreign policy issues and hold to this narrow line even when larger
constitutional questions arise. They have done little, for instance, to restrict the widespread use of executive agreements, which evade the Senate’s
constitutional right to give ‘‘advice and consent’’ on formal treaties.52
Despite the courts’ reluctance to rule on these issues, informal agreements do raise important questions about the organization of state authority for the conduct of foreign affairs. Informal agreements shift power
toward the executive and away from the legislature. In recent decades,
the U.S. Congress responded by publicly challenging the President’s
right to make serious international commitments without at least notifying the Senate. It also disputed the President’s control over undeclared
foreign conflicts by passing the War Powers Resolution.53
* * *
To summarize, then, informal agreements are often chosen because
they allow governments to act quickly and quietly. These two rationales
are often intertwined, but each is important in its own right, and each
is sufficient for choosing informal means of international cooperation.
Uncertainty and Renegotiation
Informal agreements may also be favored for an entirely different reason:
they are more easily renegotiated and less costly to abandon than treaties.
51

52

53

Just what agreements must be submitted as treaties remains ambiguous. It is a constitutional question, of course, but also a question of the political balance of power between the
Congress and the President. At one point, President Carter’s chief of staff, Hamilton
Jordan, announced that Carter would decide whether the Panama Canal agreements were
treaties or not. He ‘‘could present [the accords] to the Congress as a treaty, or as an agreement, and at the proper time he’ll make that decision.’’ Interview on ‘‘Face the Nation,’’
CBS News, cited by Loch K. Johnson in The Making of International Agreements:
Congress Confronts the Executive (New York: New York University Press, 1984), p. 141.
The U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section 2, provides that the President ‘‘shall have power,
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds
of the Senators present concur.’’ For a detailed study of the constitutional issues, see Louis
Henkin, Foreign Affairs and the Constitution (Mineola, N.Y.: Foundation Press, 1972).
See the War Powers Resolution, 87 Stat. 555, 1973; and 50 United States Code 1541–48, 1980.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

315

This flexibility is useful if there is considerable uncertainty about the
distribution of future benefits under a particular agreement. In economic
issues, this uncertainty may arise because of a shift in production functions or demand schedules, the use of new raw materials or substitute
products, or a fluctuation in macroeconomic conditions or exchange
rates. These changes could sabotage national interests in particular international agreements. The consequences might involve an unacceptable
surge in imports under existing trade pacts, for example, or the collapse
of producer cartels. In security affairs, nations might be uncertain about
the rate of technological progress or the potential for new weapons
systems. By restricting these innovations, existing arms treaties may create
unexpected future costs for one side.54 Such developments can produce
unexpected winners and losers, in either absolute or relative terms, and
change the value of existing contractual relations. Put another way, institutional arrangements (including agreements) can magnify or diminish
the distributional impact of exogenous shocks or unexpected changes.
States are naturally reluctant to make long-term, inflexible bargains
behind this veil of ignorance. Even if one state is committed to upholding
an agreement despite possible windfall gains or losses, there is no guarantee that others will do the same. The crucial point is that an agreement
might not be self-sustaining if there is an unexpected asymmetry in benefits. Such uncertainties about future benefits, together with the difficulties
of self-enforcement, pose serious threats to treaty reliability under conditions of rapid technological change, market volatility, or changing strategic vulnerabilities. The presence of such uncertainties and the dangers
they pose for breach of treaty obligations foster the pursuit of substitute
arrangements with greater flexibility.
States use several basic techniques to capture the potential gains from
cooperation despite the uncertainties. First, they craft agreements (formal
or informal) of limited duration so that all participants can calculate
their risks and benefits under the agreement with some confidence. Strategic arms treaties of several years’ duration are a good example. Second,
they include provisions that permit legitimate withdrawal from commitments under specified terms and conditions.55 In practice, states can
always abandon their international commitments, since enforcement is
so costly and problematic. The real point of such treaty terms, then, is to
54

55

For one model of how technical innovations could complicate treaty maintenance, see
Downs and Rocke, Tacit Bargaining, Arms Races, and Arms Control, chap. 5.
David, The Strategy of Treaty Termination.

316

International Law and International Relations

lower the general reputational costs of withdrawal and thereby encourage states to cooperate initially despite the risks and uncertainties. Third,
they incorporate provisions that permit partial withdrawal, covering either a temporary period or a limited set of obligations. GATT escape
clauses, which permit post hoc protection of endangered industries, are a
well-known example.56 Finally, states sometimes frame their agreements
in purely informal terms to permit their frequent adjustment. The quota
agreements of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
do exactly that. While the OPEC agreements are critically important to
the participants and are central to their economic performance, they are
framed informally to permit rapid shifts in response to changing market
conditions. Once again, the form of agreements is not dictated by their
substantive significance.
* * *
At the other end of the spectrum, in terms of formality, lie arms control treaties with detailed limitations on specific weapons systems for
relatively long periods. They, too, must confront some important uncertainties. They do so principally by restricting the agreement to verifiable
terms and a time frame that essentially excludes new weapons systems.
The institutional arrangements are thus tailored to the environment
they regulate.
Modern weapons systems require long lead times to build and deploy.
As a result, military capacity and technological advantages shift slowly
within specific weapons categories. With modern surveillance techniques,
these new weapons programs and shifting technological capacities are
not opaque to adversaries. The military environment to be regulated
is relatively stable, then, so the costs and benefits of treaty restraints
can be projected with some confidence over the medium term.
Given these conditions, treaties offer some clear advantages in arms
control. They represent detailed public commitments, duly ratified by
national political authorities. Although an aggrieved party would still
need to identify and punish any alleged breach, the use of treaties
raises the political costs of flagrant or deliberate violations (or, for
56

Article XIX of the GATT covers safeguards. It permits the Contracting Parties to offer
emergency protection to industries disrupted by imports. See Marco Bronckers, Selective
Safeguard Measures in Multilateral Trade Relations: Issues of Protectionism in GATT,
European Community, and United States Law (Deventer, Netherlands: Kluwer, 1985);
and Peter Kleen, ‘‘The Safeguard Issue in the Uruguay Round: A Comprehensive
Approach,’’ Journal of World Trade 25 (October 1989), pp. 73–92.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

317

that matter, unprovoked punishment). It does so by making disputes
more salient and accessible and by underscoring the gravity of
promises. ***
Following this logic, most arms control agreements have been set out
in treaty form. Whether the subject is nuclear or conventional forces,
test bans or weapons ceilings, American and Soviet negotiators always
aimed at formal documents with full ratification. Discussions during
a summit meeting or a walk in the woods may lay the essential groundwork for an arms agreement, but they are not agreements in themselves.57
Over the history of superpower arms control, only the tacit observance of SALT II could be classified as a major informal agreement. ***
Perhaps these tacit arrangements and encoded signals were the most that
could be salvaged from the failed treaty.
SALT II, in its informal guise, actually survived beyond the expiration date of the proposed treaty. Like most arms control agreements, it
had been written with a limited life span so that it applied in predictable
ways to existing weaponry, not to new and unforeseen developments.
Time limits like these are used to manage risks in a wide range of international agreements.58 They are especially important in cases of superpower
arms control, in which the desirability of specific agreements is related
both to particular weaponry and to the overall strategic balance. As the
military setting changes, existing commitments become more or less desirable. Arms control agreements must cope with these fluctuating benefits over the life of the agreement.
The idea is to forge agreements that provide sufficient benefits to each
side, when evaluated at each point during the life of the agreement, so that
each will choose to comply out of self-interest in order to perpetuate the
treaty.59 This self-generated compliance is crucial in superpower arms
57

58
59

Note, however, that if the discussions pertained to domestic bargains, a court might
interpret these ‘‘agreements in principle’’ as contractually binding, depending on the level
of detail and the promissory language. Once again, the absence of effective international
courts matters.
Bilder, Managing the Risks of International Agreement, pp. 49–51.
Raymond Vernon, writing on foreign investments, has shown the dangers of violating this
approach. Even if an agreement provides significant benefits to both sides, it may provide
those benefits to one side immediately and to the other much later. Such agreements are
vulnerable to noncompliance in midstream, after one side has already received its
benefits. This is one element of Vernon’s ‘‘obsolescing bargain.’’ It is a variant of Hobbes’s
critique of covenants, in which one side performs its side of the bargain first. See
Raymond Vernon, Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of U.S. Enterprises
(New York: Basic Books, 1971). On the general logic of self-sustaining agreements, see
Telser, ‘‘A Theory of Self-Enforcing Agreements,’’ pp. 27–44.

318

International Law and International Relations

control. Given the relative equality of power, U.S.–Soviet military agreements are not so much enforced as observed voluntarily. What sustains
them is each participant’s perception that they are valuable and that
cheating would prove too costly if it were matched by the other side or
if it caused the agreement to collapse altogether. To ensure that treaties
remain valuable over their entire life span, negotiators typically try to
restrict them to known weaponry and stockpiles. That translates into
fixed expiration dates.60
When agreements stretch beyond this finite horizon, signatories may
be tempted to defect as they develop new and unforeseen advantages
or become more vulnerable to surprise defection, issues that were not
fully anticipated when the agreement was made. The preference orderings that once supported cooperation may no longer hold. ***
* * *
All of these issues refer to the detailed regulation of slow-changing
strategic environments. Although the issues are crucial to national defense, they are not so sensitive diplomatically that the agreement itself
must be hidden from view. Cooperative arrangements in such issues, according to the arguments presented here, are likely to be in treaty form.

hidden agreements
When security issues must be resolved quickly or quietly to avoid serious
conflict, then less formal instruments will be chosen. If the terms are
especially sensitive, perhaps because they would humiliate one party or
convey unacceptable precedents, then the agreement itself may be hidden
from view.61 The most dangerous crisis of the nuclear era, the Cuban missile crisis, was settled by the most informal and secret exchanges between
the superpowers. The overriding aim was to defuse the immediate threat.
That meant rapid agreement on a few crucial issues, with implementation
to follow quickly. These informal exchanges were not the prelude to
agreement, as in SALT or ABM negotiations; they were the agreement.
The deal to remove missiles from Cuba was crafted through an
exchange of latters, supplemented by secret oral promises. During the
60

61

This allows negotiators to make reasonable calculations about the various parties’ ex
post incentives to defect during the life of the agreement.
In modern international politics, these hidden agreements are informal because ratification is public and the treaties are registered with the United Nations. In earlier international systems, however, neither condition applied and secret treaties were possible.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

319

crisis, the Soviets had put forward a number of inconsistent proposals
for settlement. President Kennedy responded to the most conciliatory:
Premier Khrushchev’s latter of 26 October 1962. The next day, Kennedy
accepted its basic terms and set a quick deadline for Soviet counteracceptance. The essence of the bargain was that the Soviets would remove
all missiles from Cuba in return for America’s pledge not to invade the
island. The terms were a clear U.S. victory. They completely overturned
the Soviet policy of putting nuclear missiles in the Western Hemisphere.
The Soviets got nothing publicly. They were humiliated.
U.S. acceptance of the bargain was set out in diplomatic messages
sent directly to Khrushchev. President Kennedy also sent his brother
Robert to speak with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, to convey
U.S. acceptance and to add several points that were too sensitive to include in any documentation, however informal.62 ***
* * *
The bargains that ended the Cuban missile crisis were all informal, but
their motives and their degree of informality differed. The key decisions to
remove missiles from Cuba in exchange for a pledge of noninvasion were
informal because of time pressure. They were embodied in an exchange of
messages, rather than in a single signed document, but at least the key points
were in writing. The removal of outdated Turkish and Italian missiles was
also part of the overall bargain – an essential part, according to some
participants – but it was couched in even more informal terms because of
political sensitivity. The sensitivity in this case was America’s concern with
its image as a great power and, to a lesser extent, with its role in NATO. This
kind of concern with external images is one reason why informal agreements are used for politically sensitive bargains: they can be hidden.
Once again, there are costs to be considered. If a hidden agreement is
exposed, its presence could well suggest deception – to the public, to allies,
and to other government agencies. Even if the agreement does stay hidden,
its secrecy imperils its reliability. Hidden agreements carry little information about the depth of the signatories’ commitments, poorly bind
successor governments, and fail to signal intentions to third parties. These
costs are clearly exemplified in the secret treaties between Britain and
France before World War I. They could do nothing to deter Germany,
which did not know about them. Moreover, they permitted the signatories
62

Raymond L. Garthoff, Reflections on the Cuban Missile Crisis, revised ed. (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1989), pp. 86–87.

320

International Law and International Relations

to develop markedly different conceptions about their implied commitments as allies.63
Hidden agreements carry another potential cost. They may not be well
understood inside a signatory’s own government. On the one hand, this
low profile may be a valuable tool of bureaucratic or executive control,
excluding other agencies from direct participation in making or implementing international agreements. On the other hand, the ignorance of
the excluded actors may well prove costly if their actions must later be
coordinated as part of the agreement. When that happens, hidden agreements can become a comedy of errors.
One example is the postwar American effort to restrict exports to the
Soviet bloc. To succeed, the embargo needed European support. With
considerable reluctance, West European governments finally agreed to
help, but they demanded secrecy because the embargo was so unpopular
at home. As a result, the U.S. Congress never knew that the Europeans
were actually cooperating with the American effort.64 In confused belligerence, the Congress actually passed a law to cut off foreign aid to
Europe if the allies did not aid in the embargo.65
This weak signaling function has another significant implication: it
limits the value of informal agreements as diplomatic precedents, even if
the agreements themselves are public. This limitation has two sources.
First, informal agreements are generally less visible and prominent, and
so they are less readily available as models. Second, treaties are considered
better evidence of deliberate state practice, according to diplomatic
convention and international law. Public, formal agreements are

63

64

65

In 1906, the British Foreign Minister, Sir Edward Grey, discussed the dilemmas posed by
these expectations. The entente agreements, signed by a previous British government,
‘‘created in France a belief that we shall support [the French] in war. . . . If this expectation
is disappointed, the French will never forgive us. There would also I think be a general
feeling that we had behaved badly and left France in the lurch. . . . On the other hand the
prospect of a European war and of our being involved in it is horrible.’’ See document no.
299, in G. P. Gooch and Harold Temperley, eds., British Documents on the Origin of the
War, 1898–1914, vol. 3 (London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1928), p. 266.
Although the State Department did try to persuade Congress that Western Europe
was aiding the embargo, its efforts were in vain. Quiet reassurances from the State
Department were distrusted by a hard-line, anticommunist Congress, which saw them as
self-serving maneuvers to preserve diplomatic ties. See Michael Mastanduno, ‘‘Trade as a
Strategic Weapon: American and Alliance Export Control Policy in the Early Postwar
Period,’’ in G. John Ikenberry, David A. Lake, and Michael Mastanduno, eds., The State and
American Foreign Economic Policy (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1988), p. 136.
See Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951 (‘‘Battle Act’’), 82d Congress, 1st
sess., 65 Stat. 644.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

321

conventionally understood as contributing to diplomatic precedent. Precisely for that reason informal agreements are less useful as precedents and
more useful when states want to limit any broader, adverse implications of
specific bargains. They frame an agreement in more circumscribed ways
than a treaty. Discussions between long-time adversaries, for instance,
usually begin on an informal, low-level basis to avoid any implicit recognition of wider claims. Trade relations may also be conducted indirectly,
using third-party entrepoˆts, to avoid any formal contract relationships
between estranged governments.
* * *
*** In this case and in many others, informal agreements are useful
because they facilitate cooperation on specific issues while constraining
any wider implications regarding other issues or third parties. They permit
bounded cooperation.66

the status of tacit agreements
We have concentrated, until now, on informal bargains that are openly
expressed, at least among the participants themselves. The form may be
written or oral, detailed or general, but there is some kind of explicit
bargain.
Tacit agreements, on the other hand, are not explicit. They are implied,
understood, or inferred rather than directly stated.67 Such implicit arrangements extend the scope of informal cooperation. They go beyond
the secrecy of oral agreements and, at times, may be the only way to
avoid serious conflict on sensitive issues. Such bargains, however, are all
too often mirages, carrying the superficial appearance of agreement but
not its substance.
The unspoken ‘‘rules’’ of the Cold War are sometimes considered tacit
agreements.68 The superpowers staked out their respective spheres of
66

67

68

Because informal extradition arrangements are ad hoc, they are easily severed. That is
a mixed blessing. It means that extradition issues are directly implicated in the larger
issues of bilateral diplomacy. They cannot be treated as distinct, technical issues covered
by their own treaty rules. For example, the bloody suppression of popular uprisings
in 1989 in the People’s Republic of China blocked prisoner exchanges and made trade
and investment ties politically riskier.
This definition is based on the second meaning of ‘‘tacit’’ in The Oxford English
Dictionary, 2d ed., vol. 17 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), p. 527.
See Keal, Unspoken Rules and Superpower Dominance; and Friedrich Kratochwil,
Rules, Norms and Decisions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), chap. 3.

322

International Law and International Relations

influence and did not directly engage each other’s forces. Yet they made
no explicit agreements on either point. In the early years of the Cold War,
the United States quietly conceded de facto control over Eastern Europe
to the Soviets. The policies that laid the basis for NATO were designed to
contain the Soviet Union, both diplomatically and militarily, but nothing
more. They made no effort to roll back the Soviet army’s wartime gains,
which had been converted into harsh political dominion in the late 1940s.
America’s restraint amounted to a spheres-of-influence policy without
actually acknowledging Moscow’s regional security interests. This silence
only confirmed the Soviets’ worst fears and contributed to bipolar
hostilities.
In the bitter climate of the early Cold War period, however, no U.S. official was prepared to concede the Soviets’ dominance in Eastern Europe.
Earlier conferences at Yalta and Potsdam had seemed to do so, but
now these concessions were pushed aside, at least rhetorically.69 While
Democrats reinterpreted these agreements or considered them irrelevant
because of Soviet violations, Republicans denounced them as immoral
or even treasonous.70 Backed by these domestic sentiments, U.S. foreign
policy was couched in the language of universal freedoms, conceding
nothing to the Soviets in Eastern Europe.71 In practice, however, the United
States tacitly accepted Soviet control up to the borders of West Germany.
How does tacit acceptance of this kind compare with the informal but
explicit bargains we have been considering? They are quite different in
principle, I think. The most fundamental problem in analyzing so-called
69

70

71

A few international lawyers argued that the Yalta and Potsdam agreements were binding
treaty commitments. The U.S. State Department did publish the Yalta Agreement in the
Executive Agreements Series (no. 498) and in U.S. Treaties in Force (1963). In 1948, Sir
Hersch Lauterpacht said that they ‘‘incorporated definite rules of conduct which may
be regarded as legally binding on the States in question.’’ The British and American
governments explicitly rejected that view. In 1956, in an aide-me´moire to the Japanese
government, the State Department declared that ‘‘the United States regards the so-called
Yalta Agreement as simply a statement of common purposes by the heads of the
participating governments and . . . not as of any legal effect in transferring territories.’’
See Department of State Bulletin, vol. 35, 1956, p. 484, cited by Schachter in ‘‘The
Twilight Existence of Nonbinding International Agreements,’’ p. 298 n. See also L. P. L.
Oppenheim, Peace, vol. 1 of H. Lauterpacht, ed., International Law: A Treatise, 7th ed.
(London: Longmans, Green, 1948), p. 788, section 487.
The one major exception among U.S. politicians was former vice president Henry
Wallace, representing the left wing of the Democratic party. Wallace openly stated that the
Soviets had legitimate security interests in Eastern Europe and should not be challenged
directly there. His views were widely denounced in both parties and won few votes.
Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., ‘‘Origins of the Cold War,’’ Foreign Affairs 46 (Autumn 1967),
pp. 22–52.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

323

tacit bargains lies in determining whether any real agreement exists.
More broadly, is there some kind of mutual policy adjustment that is
(implicitly) contingent on reciprocity? If so, what are the parties’ commitments, as they understand them? Often, what pass for tacit bargains
are actually policies that have been chosen unilaterally and independently,
in light of the unilateral policies of others. There may be an ‘‘understanding’’
of other parties’ policies but no implicit agreements to adjust these policies
on a mutual or contingent basis. Each party is simply maximizing its own
values, subject to the independent choices made or expected to be made by
others. What looks like a silent bargain may simply be a Nash equilibrium.
This is not to say that tacit bargains are always a chimera. Each party
can adjust its policies on a provisional basis, awaiting some conforming
adjustment by others. *** The problem, as George Downs and David
Rocke have shown, is that states may not always know when others are
cooperating or defecting and may not know what their intentions are.72
One state may then punish others for noncompliance or defections that
are more apparent than real and thus begin a downward spiral of retaliation. Such imperfect knowledge does not prevent tacit cooperation, but
it does suggest serious impediments and risks to tacit bargaining, the
need for more ‘‘fault tolerant’’ strategies, and the potential gains from
more explicit communication and greater transparency.
In ongoing diplomatic interactions in which each side continually
responds to the other’s policies and initiatives, it may also be difficult
to distinguish between tacit bargains and unilateral acts. One side may
consider its own restraint part of an implicit bargain, while the other
considers it nothing more than prudent self-interest. In the early Cold
War, for instance, the United States could do nothing to reverse Soviet
control in Eastern Europe without waging war. There was little to be
gained by providing substantial aid to local resistance movements. Their
chances for success were slim, and the dangers of escalation were significant. Any U.S. efforts to destabilize Soviet control in Eastern Europe
would have markedly increased international tensions and raised the
dangers of U.S.–Soviet conflict in central Europe. Under the circumstances,
American policy was restrained. More aggressive action in Eastern Europe
was deterred by the risks and poor chances of success, not by the implied
promise of some reciprocal restraint by the Soviets. There was a learning
process but no tacit bargain.
72

See the following works by Downs and Rocke: ‘‘Tacit Bargaining and Arms Control’’;
and Tacit Bargaining, Arms Races, and Arms Control.

324

International Law and International Relations

In any case, most tacit bargains are hard to identify with confidence. By
their very nature, implicit agreements leave little trace. Moreover, what
may appear to be implicit agreements are often explicable as outcomes
of more narrowly self-interested unilateral policies. Given these difficulties, one valuable approach to uncovering tacit bargains is to examine
the reactions and discourse surrounding possible ‘‘violations.’’ Tacit
bargains, like their more explicit counterparts, are based on the reciprocal
exchange of benefits. Breaking the terms of that exchange is likely to be
given voice. There will be talk of betrayal and recriminations, words of
regret at having extended generous but uncompensated concessions.
There ought to be some distinctive recognition that reasonable expectations and inferences, built up during the course of joint interactions,
have been breached. Thus, there is regret and not merely surprise.73
* * *
The dangers of misunderstanding are certainly not unique to tacit
agreements. They lurk in all contracts, even the most formal and detailed.
But the process of negotiating written agreements does offer a chance to
clarify understandings, to agree on joint interpretations, to draft detailed,
restrictive language, and to establish mechanisms for ongoing consultation, such as the U.S.–Soviet Standing Consultative Commission. Tacit
agreements, by definition, lack these procedures, lack this detail, and lack
any explicit understandings.
These limitations in tacit agreements are not always a drawback. If the
agreement covers only a few basic points, if the parties clearly understand
the provisions in the same way, and if there are no individual incentives
to betray or distort the terms, then some key defects of tacit bargains
are irrelevant. Some coordination problems fit this description. They
involve tacit agreement among multiple participants who cannot communicate directly with one another.74
Unfortunately, the hard issues of international politics are different.
They involve complicated questions without salient solutions, where
national interests are less than congruent. Any commitments to cooperate
need to be specified in some detail.75 The agreements themselves are not
73

74
75

In The Cement of Society, Elster makes this distinction between regret and surprise
and relates it to two forms of order. Departures from regularized, predictable behavior
give rise to surprise. Unreciprocated cooperation produces regret.
Edna Ullmann-Margalit, The Emergence of Norms (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977).
This does not rule out deliberate vagueness on some issues as part of a larger, more
detailed settlement. Cooperation is not comprehensive, and some issues have to be
finessed if any agreement is to be reached.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

325

so simply self-sustaining. If cooperation is to be achieved, the terms must
be crafted deliberately to minimize the risks of misunderstanding and
noncompliance.

choosing between treaties and informal agreements
Because tacit bargains are so limited, states are reluctant to depend on
them when undertaking important projects. They want some clear, written
signal that an agreement has been reached and includes specific terms.
When a state’s choice of policies is contingent on the choices of others,
it will prefer to spell out these respective choices and the commitments
they entail and will want to improve information flows among interdependent actors. These requirements can be met by either a formal treaty
or an informal agreement, each with its own generic strengths and weaknesses. Each is more or less suited to resolving specific kinds of international bargaining problems.
These differences mean that actors must choose between them for
specific agreements. However, they may also complement each other as
elements of more inclusive bargains. The treaty commitments that define
NATO, for instance, are given their military and diplomatic significance
by a stream of informal summit declarations that address contemporary
alliance issues such as weapons modernization, arms control, and Soviet
policy initiatives.
Informal agreements, as I have noted, are themselves quite varied,
ranging from simple oral commitments to joint summit declarations to
elaborate latters of intent, such as stabilization agreements with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Some of the most elaborate are
quite similar to treaties but with two crucial exceptions. The diplomatic
status of the promises is less clear-cut, and the agreements typically do
not require elaborate ratification procedures. They lack, to a greater or
lesser extent, the state’s fullest and most authoritative imprimatur. The
effects on reputation are thus constrained, but so is the dependability of
the agreement.
States equivocate, in principle, on their adherence to these informal
bargains. They are often unwilling to grant them the status of legally
binding agreements. But what does that mean in practice, given that no
international agreements can bind their signatories like domestic contracts can? The argument presented here is that treaties send a conventional signal to other signatories and to third parties concerning the
gravity and irreversibility of a state’s commitments. By putting reputation

326

International Law and International Relations

at stake, they add to the costs of breaking agreements or, rather, they
do so if a signatory values reputation. Informal agreements are typically
more elusive on these counts.
These escape hatches are the common denominators of informal agreements, from the most elaborate written documents to the sketchiest oral
agreements. The Helsinki Final Act, with its prominent commitments on
human rights, is otherwise virtually identical to a treaty. It includes
sixty pages of detailed provisions, only to declare that it should not be
considered a treaty with binding commitments.76 At the other extreme are
oral bargains, which are the most secret, the most malleable, and the
quickest to conclude. Like their more elaborate counterparts, they are
a kind of moral and legal oxymoron: an equivocal promise.
The speed and simplicity of oral bargains make them particularly
suited for clandestine deals and crisis resolution. But for obvious reasons,
states are reluctant to depend on them more generally. Oral agreements
can encompass only a few major points of agreement; they cannot set
out complicated obligations in any detail. They are unreliable in several
distinct ways. First, it is difficult to tell whether they have been officially
authorized and whether the government as a whole is committed to them.
Second, they usually lack the visibility and public commitment that support compliance. Third, to ensure implementation in complex bureaucratic states, oral agreements must be translated into written directives at
some point.77 Sincere mistakes, omissions, and misunderstandings may
creep in during this translation process with no opportunity to correct
76

77

The Helsinki Final Act, formally known as the Final Act of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe, was concluded in 1975 and signed by thirty-five states. On
the one hand, the states declared their ‘‘determination to act in accordance with the
provisions contained’’ in the text. On the other hand, these were not to be the binding
commitments of a treaty. The text plainly said that it was not eligible for registration with
the United Nations, as a treaty would be. Several democratic states, led by the United
States, declared at the time that this document was not a treaty. ‘‘There does not appear
to be any evidence that the other signatory states disagreed with this understanding,’’
according to Schachter. The result is a curious contradiction: a nonbinding bargain. It
juxtaposes elaborate ‘‘commitments’’ with a claim that they are not to be registered, as
a treaty would be. The point, clearly, is to exempt the provisions from the legally binding
status of treaty commitments. For an interesting analysis of the Helsinki agreement and
its ambiguous status in international law, see Schachter, ‘‘The Twilight Existence of
Nonbinding International Agreements,’’ p. 296. The text of the Helsinki Final Act can
be found in International Legal Materials, vol. 14, 1975, pp. 1293 ff.
This translation of oral agreements into writing is required by the U.S. State Department’s regulations implementing the Case Act. See ‘‘International Agreement Regulations,’’ 22 Code of Federal Regulations, part 181; and 46 Federal Register, 13 July 1981,
pp. 35917 ff.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

327

them before an interstate dispute emerges. Last, but most important of
all, it is easier to disclaim oral bargains or to recast them on favorable
terms. Nobody ever lost an argument in the retelling, and oral bargains
have many of the same properties. Perhaps this is what Sam Goldwyn
had in mind when he said that verbal contracts were not worth the paper
they were written on.78
Putting informal agreements into writing avoids most of these problems. It generally produces evidence of an intended bargain. What it
still lacks is the depth of national commitment associated with treaties.
That is the irreducible price of maintaining policy flexibility.
Informal agreements are also less public than treaties, in two ways.
First, because states do not acknowledge them as fundamental, selfbinding commitments, they are less convincing evidence of recognized
state practices. They are thus less significant as precedents. For example,
informal agreements on trade or extradition are no proof of implicit
diplomatic recognition, as a formal treaty would be. These limitations
mean that informal agreements are more easily restricted to a particular
issue. They have fewer ramifications for collateral issues or third parties.
They permit cooperation to be circumscribed. Second, informal agreements are more easily kept secret, if need be. There is no requirement
to ratify them or to enact them into domestic law, and there is no need
to register them with international organizations for publication. For
highly sensitive bargains, such as the use of noncombatants’ territory in
guerrilla wars, that is a crucial attribute.79
Treaties, too, can be kept secret. There is no inherent reason why they
must be made public. Indeed, secret treaties were a central instrument of
78

79

There is a nice irony here. Goldwyn’s disparaging comments about oral agreements
are themselves probably apocryphal. He regularly mangled the English language, and
quotes like this were often attributed to him, whether he said them or not. The murky
origins of this quotation underscore a fundamental problem with oral bargains. How can
third parties ever ascertain who really promised what to whom? Goldwyn himself gave
one answer to that question: ‘‘Two words: im possible.’’ See Carol Easton, The Search
for Sam Goldwyn (New York: William Morrow, 1976), pp. 150–51; and Arthur
Marx, Goldwyn: A Biography of the Man Behind the Myth (New York: Norton,
1976), pp. 8–10.
States on the borders of a guerrilla war are vital allies to the protagonists. They offer
a secure launching pad for military operations and a secure site for communications and
resupply. If their role becomes too open and prominent, however, the bordering states
could be brought directly into the fighting as protagonists themselves. This is clearly
a delicate relationship. It is best managed by informal agreements, usually secret ones,
such as those reached by the United States and Laos during the Vietnam War. See
Johnson, The Making of International Agreements, p. 68.

328

International Law and International Relations

balance-of-power diplomacy in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.80 But there are powerful reasons why secret treaties are rare today.
The first and most fundamental is the rise of democratic states with
principles of public accountability and some powers of legislative
oversight. Secret treaties are difficult to reconcile with these democratic
procedures. The second reason is that ever since the United States
entered World War I, it has opposed secret agreements as a matter of
basic principle and has enshrined its position in the peace settlements of
both world wars.
The decline of centralized foreign policy institutions, which worked
closely with a handful of political leaders, sharply limits the uses of secret
treaties. Foreign ministries no longer hold the same powers to commit
states to alliances, to shift those alliances, to divide conquered territory,
and to hide such critical commitments from public view. The discretionary powers of a Bismarck or Metternich have no equivalent in modern
Western states. Instead, democratic leaders rely on informal instruments
to strike international bargains in spite of domestic institutional restraints. That is precisely the objection raised by the U.S. Congress regarding
war powers and executive agreements.
When leaders are freed from such institutional restraints, they can hide
their bargains without making them informal. They can simply use secret
treaties and protocols, as Stalin and Hitler did in August 1939 when they
carved up Eastern Europe.81 ***
Aside from these protocols, secret pacts have rarely been used for
important interstate projects since World War I. That partly reflects the

80

81

The importance of secret treaties in European diplomacy was underscored when
Woodrow Wilson tried to abolish the practice after World War I. Clemenceau and Lloyd
George ‘‘said emphatically that they could not agree never to make a private or secret
diplomatic agreement of any kind. Such understandings were the foundation of European
diplomacy, and everyone knew that to abandon secret negotiations would be to invite
chaos. To this [Colonel] House replied . . . that there was no intention to prohibit
confidential talks on delicate matters, but only to require that treaties resulting from
such conversations should become ‘part of the public law of the world.’ ’’ Quoted by
Arthur Walworth in America’s Moment: 1918 – American Diplomacy at the End of
World War I (New York: Norton, 1977), p. 56.
See ‘‘Treaty of Non-Aggression Between Germany and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, August 23, 1939, Signed by Ribbentrop and Molotov,’’ document no. 228 in
United Kingdom, Foreign Office, The Last Days of Peace, August 9 – September 3, 1939,
series D, vol. 7 of Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918–1945 (London: Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1956), pp. 245–46. The volume provides official translations
of documents from captured archives of the German Foreign Ministry and the Reich
Chancellery.

Why Are Some International Agreements Informal?

329

war experience itself and partly reflects America’s rise to global prominence. While the war was still being fought, Leon Trotsky had published
the czarist government’s secret treaties. They showed how Italy had been
enticed into the war (through the London treaty) and revealed that Russia
had been promised control of Constantinople. The Allies were embarrassed by the publication of these self-seeking agreements and were forced
to proclaim the larger principles for which their citizens were fighting
and dying.82
Woodrow Wilson had always wanted such a statement of intent. He
argued that this was a war about big issues and grand ideals, not about
narrow self-interest or territorial aggrandizement. He dissociated the
United States from the Allies’ earlier secret commitments and sought
to abolish them forever once the war had been won. At the Versailles
peace conference, where Wilson stated his Fourteen Points to guide the
negotiations, he began with a commitment to ‘‘open covenants . . . openly
arrived at.’’ He would simply eliminate ‘‘private international understandings of any kind [so that] diplomacy shall proceed always frankly
and in the public view.’’83
These Wilsonian ideals were embodied in Article 18 of the League of
Nations Covenant and later in Article 102 of the United Nations (UN)
Charter. They provided a means for registering international agreements
and, in the case of the UN, an incentive to do so. Only registered
agreements could be accorded legal status before any UN affiliate, including the International Court of Justice. This mixture of legalism and
idealism could never abolish private understandings, but it did virtually
eliminate secret treaties among democratic states. Informal agreements
live on as their closest modern substitutes.

82

83

Trotsky’s release of the secret documents was shrewd and effective. There was a strong,
sustained reaction against secret diplomacy, mainly in the Anglo-Saxon countries. Wilson
himself was politically embarrassed. Either his wartime allies had not told him of their
earlier bargains or they had told him and he had kept the secret, despite his principled
attacks on secret diplomacy. See Mario Toscano, An Introduction to the History of
Treaties and International Politics, vol. 1 of The History of Treaties and International
Politics (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1966), pp. 42 and 215; and
James Joll, Europe Since 1870, 2d ed. (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books, 1976),
p. 233.
Wilson’s war aims were stated to a joint session of Congress on 8 January 1918. When
European leaders later challenged this commitment to open covenants, Wilson announced that he would never compromise the ‘‘essentially American terms in the
program,’’ including Point One. See Edward M. House, The Intimate Papers of Colonel
House, vol. 4, ed. by Charles Seymour (London: Ernest Benn, 1928), pp. 182–83.

330

International Law and International Relations

conclusion: international cooperation
by informal agreement
The varied uses of informal agreements illuminate the possibilities of international cooperation and some recurrent limitations. They underscore
the fact that cooperation is often circumscribed and that its very limits may
be fundamental to the participants. Their aim is often to restrict the scope
and duration of agreements and to avoid any generalization of their
implications. The ends are often particularistic, the means ad hoc. Informal bargains are delimited from the outset. More often than not, there
is no intention (and no realistic possibility) of extending them to wider
issues, other actors, longer time periods, or more formal obligations. They
are simply not the beginning of a more inclusive process of cooperation
or a more durable one.
These constraints shape the form that agreements can take. Interstate
bargains are frequently designed to be hidden from domestic constituencies, to avoid legislative ratification, to escape the attention of other
states, or to be renegotiated. They may well be conceived with no view
and no aspirations about the longer term. They are simply transitory
arrangements, valuable now but ready to be abandoned or reordered as
circumstances change. The diplomatic consequences and reputational
effects are minimized by using informal agreements rather than treaties.
Informal agreements may also be chosen because of time pressures. To
resolve a crisis, the agreement may have to be struck quickly and
definitively, with no time for elaborate documents.
Because informal agreements can accommodate these restrictions,
they are common tools for international cooperation. States use them,
and use them frequently, to pursue national goals by international agreement. They are flexible, and they are commonplace. They constitute, as
Judge Richard Baxter once remarked, a ‘‘vast substructure of intergovernmental paper.’’84 Their presence testifies to the perennial efforts
to achieve international cooperation and to its institutional variety. Their
form testifies silently to its limits.
84

Baxter, ‘‘International Law in ‘Her Infinite Variety,’ ’’ p. 549.

14
The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design: Explaining
Legalism in Regional Trade Pacts
James McCall Smith

In recent years two parallel trends have emerged in the organization of
international trade. The first development is the rise of regionalism, with
a host of new integration initiatives drawn along geographical lines. ***
The second is a distinct but less widespread move toward legalism in the
enforcement of trade agreements. To an unusual extent trading states have
delegated to impartial third parties the authority to review and issue
binding rulings on alleged treaty violations, at times based on complaints
filed by nonstate or supranational actors. Separately, the two trends have
garnered scholarly attention ***. The intersection of these two trends,
however, remains little examined.
Few comparative studies of institutional form, across different trade
accords, have been undertaken. This is curious, for regional trade pacts
exhibit considerable variation in governance structures. Moreover, questions of institutional design – which constitute a dimension of bargaining
distinct from the substantive terms of liberalization – have proven contentious in recent trade negotiations, underscoring their political salience.1 The creation of supranational institutions in regional trade accords
has direct implications for academic debates regarding sovereignty,
1

Mexico threatened to walk away from the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) over the inclusion of sanctions in the side accords. See International Trade
Reporter, 18 August 1993, 1352. Canada risked its 1988 pact with the United States
through its insistence on ‘‘binding’’ dispute settlement. See Hart 1994, 260–63, 301–302.

For helpful comments I would like to thank the editors of IO, three anonymous reviewers,
John Barton, Martha Finnemore, James Foster, Geoffrey Garrett, Kurt Gaubatz, Judith
Goldstein, Miles Kahler, Stephen Krasner, Derek Scissors, Susan Sell, Lee Sigelman, Paul
Wahlbeck, and Beth Yarbrough.

331

332

International Law and International Relations

globalization, and interdependence. Nevertheless, research on this particular issue remains scarce. ***
Addressing this gap, I focus on a specific aspect of governance in
international trade: the design of dispute settlement procedures. In
particular, I investigate the conditions under which member states adopt
legalistic mechanisms for resolving disputes and enforcing compliance in
regional trade accords. Some pacts are diplomatic, requiring only consultations between disputing states, but others invest standing judicial
tribunals with the authority to issue prompt, impartial, and enforceable
third-party rulings on any and all alleged treaty violations. To account
for these variable levels of legalism, I offer a theory of trade dispute
settlement design based on the domestic political trade-off between treaty
compliance and policy discretion. The chief implication of this theory
highlights the importance of economic asymmetry, in interaction with
the proposed depth of integration, as a robust predictor of dispute settlement design. This framework helps explain otherwise puzzling delegations of authority by sovereign states to supranational judiciaries, linking
variation in institutional design to domestic political factors conventionally ignored by traditional systemic theories of international relations. ***
At issue in this study is the nature of ex ante institutional design, not
the record of ex post state behavior. During trade negotiations, governments stand, in part, behind a veil of ignorance with regard to future
implementation of the treaty and future disputes. The question I investigate involves the type of dispute settlement mechanism, given this
uncertainty, the signatory states agree to establish. In advance of actual
integration, it is difficult to distinguish sincere commitments from
symbolic ones. Even the most successful regional initiative, the European
Union, has weathered crises of confidence in its uneven movement toward
a single market.2 Without evaluating the extent to which integration has
proceeded, I seek to explain the design of the institutions within which
that process unfolds. I examine the institutional structure of the general
game, not the outcome of specific disputes, which depend on strategic
interactions and highly contextual international and domestic political
variables. ***
Nevertheless, I do assert that legalism tends to improve compliance by
increasing the costs of opportunism. Legalistic mechanisms alter the
cost-benefit calculus of cheating by increasing the probability of detection, resolving conflicts of interpretation, and endorsing commensurate
2

Tsoukalis 1993, 14–45.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

333

sanctions or making rulings directly applicable in domestic law. [Even]
the most legalistic of mechanisms may not guarantee treaty compliance
by sovereign states willing to defy its rulings. * Likewise, the least legalistic
of pacts may give rise to highly successful integration. * Legalism is thus
neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for full compliance, but it
does influence compliance by providing rulings of violation that are viewed
as credible and legitimate by the community of member states. This
information at a minimum increases the reputational costs of noncompliance, potentially jeopardizing opportunities for future international
cooperation on issues of relevance to the domestic economy.3
In the first section I introduce the dependent variable, levels of legalism,
by identifying specific institutional features that render one dispute
settlement mechanism more or less legalistic than another. Next I sketch
the elements of a theory of dispute settlement design, defining the basic
trade-off and how it varies. Subsequent sections delimit the data set of
regional trade agreements, summarize the principal characteristics of their
dispute settlement mechanisms, and evaluate the explanatory leverage of
my analytical framework ***.

defining the spectrum: from diplomacy to legalism
Discussions of dispute settlement in international and comparative law
texts present the universe of institutional options as a standard set that
ranges from direct negotiation at one extreme to third-party adjudication
at the other.4 Which features of institutional design determine the level
of legalism along this spectrum? The first question is whether there is
an explicit right to third-party review of complaints regarding treaty
application and interpretation. A handful of agreements provide only for
consultations and perhaps mediation or conciliation, which implies a very
low level of legalism in that the disputing parties retain the right to reject
any proposed settlement lawfully – the hallmark of a diplomatic system.5
These pacts are identical in effect to treaties that offer an arbitral process
but require explicit consent from all parties to the dispute, including the
defendant, before the arbitration proceeds [– and to treaties where member countries that are not directly involved in the dispute control access to
the arbitration process.] ***
3
4
5

Maggi 1996.
See Malanczuk 1997, 273–305; Merrills 1991; and Shapiro 1981.
Diverse examples include the 1969 Southern African Customs Union; the 1983
ANZCERTA; and the 1992 Central European Free Trade Agreement.

334

International Law and International Relations

Where there is an automatic right to third-party review, the second issue
concerns the status in international law of rulings that result from the
dispute settlement process. The question is whether arbitral or judicial
rulings and reports are formally binding in international legal terms. ***
If the disputants can lawfully ignore panel recommendations or sabotage
panel reports by lobbying political allies, the system is less legalistic than
mechanisms whose third-party rulings directly and irreversibly create an
international legal obligation.
The next question concerns third parties – in particular, the number,
term, and method of selecting arbitrators or judges in each treaty. At the
diplomatic end of the spectrum are mechanisms that call for the appointment of ad hoc arbitrators to address a particular dispute. *** At the
legalistic end are treaties that create a standing tribunal of justices who rule
collectively on any and all disputes during extended terms of service. Even
in the absence of explicit stare decisis, decisions made by a standing tribunal are likely to be more consistent over time – and thus more legalistic –
than rulings by ad hoc panels whose membership changes with each dispute. [Most] agreements lie between these two poles. What varies is the
extent to which disputants are able to angle strategically for sympathetic or
biased judges. With a standing tribunal, the parties have little if any influence over the composition of the court after its initial establishment. With
arbitrators selected ad hoc by the disputants, however, each party may be
free to name nearly half the panel. Some arbitration mechanisms include
innovative procedures that help enhance the impartiality of the panel ***.
A fourth question is which actors have standing to file complaints and
obtain rulings. The tradition in international law has long been that only
sovereign states have full international legal personality, according states
an almost exclusive right to conclude international agreements and to
bring claims regarding treaty violations. Most trade accords reflect this
tradition by allowing only member states to initiate disputes. In some
instances, however, standing is defined more expansively to allow treaty
organizations – such as a secretariat or commission, which may have
a bureaucratic interest in the treaty’s effective implementation – to file
official complaints against member countries for some failure to comply.6
In other agreements even private individuals or firms, whose economic
interests are most directly at stake in the context of trade policy, have
6

In the Andean Pact, the Junta – a panel of three technocrats who administer the treaty –
has standing to file complaints of noncompliance against member states. The European
Union Commission enjoys similar powers.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

335

standing to file complaints and require a ruling. *** Where individuals
have standing, they can bring cases in one of two ways: directly, by filing a
complaint with the tribunal; or indirectly, by requesting a domestic court
to seek a preliminary ruling from the tribunal on any issue of relevance to
the treaty. *** In general, the more expansive the definition of standing,
the more legalistic the dispute settlement mechanism. When treaty
organizations and private parties can file complaints, alleged violations
are likely to be more frequent than if standing is accorded only to states,
whose multiple diplomatic considerations make them reluctant to pursue
certain cases.
Finally, there is the question of remedies in cases of treaty violation.
The most legalistic alternative is to give direct effect in domestic law to dispute settlement rulings made at the international level.7 Where rulings
are directly applicable, government agencies and courts have a binding
obligation under national law to abide by and enforce their terms. In most
instances direct effect creates a right of action in national courts, allowing
individuals or independent agencies to invoke the treaty and file suit
against the government for disregarding its international commitments.8
*** [Another] remedy is the authorization of retaliatory trade sanctions.
Permission to impose sanctions is granted only to the complaining state,
not to the community of member states for collective action. This type of
decentralized enforcement system has deep roots in international law ***.
For several reasons, sanctions are not always viewed as an effective remedy
in international trade,9 but other things being equal treaties that provide
for sanctions are more legalistic than those with no remedy at all ***.
The specific way in which sanctions are authorized is relevant. Some
accords *** require approval from a political body ***. Agreements that
empower the arbitral panel or tribunal to authorize or prescribe sanctions
directly are less subject to political interference and thus more legalistic.
7

8

9

The question of direct effect may depend as much on domestic constitutional norms as on
the terms of the treaty. *** I confine my analysis to explicit treaty provisions, assuming
that reciprocal treaties should not provide for direct effect where domestic constitutional
norms preclude it. ***
The existence of a private right of action may also depend as much on domestic law as on
specific treaty provisions. Again I restrict my analysis to the terms of the treaty. Some
agreements ignore or confuse the issue, but others are clear.
Even if carefully designed, sanctions impose costs on the sanctioning country as well as on
the defendant. Moreover, a system of sanctions systematically favors larger, less tradedependent states, which are able to implement and withstand retaliatory measures with
less economic dislocation than smaller, more open countries. For a general critique of
sanctions, see Chayes and Chayes 1995.

International Law and International Relations

336

table 14.1. Institutional Options in Dispute Settlement Design
Treaty provision

More diplomatic

Third-party
review
Third-party
ruling
Judges

None
Recommendation

Standing

Ad hoc
arbitrators
States only

Remedy

None

,—————.

More legalistic

Access controlled by
political body
Binding if approved
by political body
Ad hoc panelists
drawn from roster
States and treaty
organs

Automatic right
to review
Directly binding
obligation
Standing tribunal
of justices
States, treaty
organs, and
individuals
Direct effect in
domestic law

Retaliatory sanctions

Also relevant is whether the treaty provides any guidelines or potential
limits on the level of sanctions that is approved. Mechanisms that offer a
blanket authorization are less legalistic than those that apply certain norms
regarding the appropriate level and sectoral composition of sanctions. ***
Table 14.1 summarizes the key features of institutional design that
make a dispute settlement system more or less legalistic. This list is not
comprehensive, since other issues – such as the presence or absence of
deadlines or the extent to which arbitrators and judges have relevant legal
expertise – can push an agreement toward one end of the spectrum or the
other. * With these basic indicators, however, it is possible to categorize
individual pacts. Even though the features in Table 14.1 are in theory
independent of one another, they tend to cluster in practice, suggesting
a hierarchical ordering of four dimensions: third-party review, third-party
ruling, judges, and standing. The first question is whether the treaty
provides for independent third-party review. Among pacts with some
system of review, the next issue is whether rulings are directly binding in
international law. Among pacts with binding rulings, those with standing
tribunals are more legalistic than those with ad hoc arbitrators. Finally,
tribunals with jurisdiction over claims by individuals, treaty organs, and
states alike are more legalistic than those accessible only by states. In terms
of remedy, the most legalistic pacts provide rulings with direct effect in
national law, but the presence or absence of sanctions – though still
significant – is a less meaningful indicator of legalism, with unilateral measures always available to states seeking to enforce third-party rulings in
the decentralized international system. The basic issue is how effectively
a given dispute settlement mechanism is able to produce impartial,

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

337

consistent, and legally binding third-party rulings on any and all alleged
treaty violations.

the argument
When negotiating a trade pact, governments must decide how legalistic
its dispute settlement mechanism will be. In making this choice, political leaders confront a trade-off between mutually exclusive goals. On
the one hand, they care about compliance with the agreement, the value
of which depends on the extent to which other parties honor their commitments. The more legalistic the dispute settlement mechanism they
design, the higher the likely level of compliance. On the other hand, they
also care about their own policy discretion – and the less legalistic the
mechanism, the greater their discretion to craft policies that solidify
domestic support.10 ***
Policy Discretion
International trade agreements pose a familiar dilemma for national
political leaders motivated to remain in power.11 Among the principal
determinants of any executive’s or ruling party’s popularity is the state of
the economy.12 One way political leaders seek to increase growth and
create jobs is to negotiate reciprocal trade agreements, which almost as
a rule produce net welfare benefits.13 The political dilemma lies in the
distribution of costs and benefits. Although benefits outweigh costs in
the aggregate, for consumers and producers they are diffuse, or shared in
small amounts by numerous individuals, whereas costs are concentrated.
In political terms, concentrated costs imply organized opposition from
adversely affected groups in import-competing sectors.
* * *
This generic problem of trade liberalization – diffuse net benefits, concentrated costs – is a factor in the political calculus of dispute settlement design. Political leaders cannot perfectly anticipate which groups
will bear the heaviest costs of adjustment. During the negotiations, they
10

11

12
13

Yarbrough and Yarbrough pose a trade-off between rigor and the opportunity for
derogations that parallels the one I have drawn between treaty value and policy
discretion; See Yarbrough and Yarbrough 1997, 148–49; and Smith 1995.
On the political economy of trade, see Schattschneider 1935; Pastor 1980; and Magee,
Brock, and Young 1989.
See Kieweit and Rivers 1984; and Alesina and Rosenthal 1995.
Wolf 1987.

338

International Law and International Relations

propose specific exemptions or side payments for sectors that are clearly
vulnerable to import competition.[14] The substantive terms of a treaty,
which establish the depth and pace of liberalization, usually reflect such
concerns. But political leaders realize that liberalization will impose concentrated costs they cannot foresee. As a result, they want to retain the
discretion to respond in the future to uncertain demands for relief from
injured groups.15 Under a legalistic dispute settlement system, political
leaders who provide import protection ex post run the risk of provoking
complaints from foreign trade partners that could lead to rulings of
violation, with attendant reputational costs and perhaps sanctions.
In disputes over nontariff barriers, legalistic dispute settlement also
threatens to compromise the autonomy of domestic officials across a range
of general regulations, from health and safety standards to environmental,
antitrust, and procurement policies. *** In recent decades, *** the principal obstacles to open trade have been nontariff barriers, domestic
regulations that discriminate against foreign producers, [which dominate
the agendas of contemporary trade negotiations.] The politics of regulation is not unlike the political economy of trade: the marginal impact of
regulatory policy on small, organized groups is often disproportionately
large compared to its impact on the general, unorganized public. This
characteristic increases its salience to officials seeking to remain in
power, *** who may now face unprecedented complaints from foreign
governments alleging unfair regulatory barriers to trade. If the merits of
these complaints are judged in legalistic dispute settlement procedures, the
policy discretion of political leaders may be constrained – and in areas where
the domestic political stakes, given mobilized interest groups, are high.
* * *
Treaty Compliance
If legalistic trade dispute settlement poses such a clear domestic political
threat, why would trade negotiators ever consider, much less adopt, any
binding procedures? The answer lies in the benefits generated by dispute
settlement mechanisms that improve government compliance and instill business confidence. The very procedures that constrain the policy
autonomy of public officials, giving rise to political risks, also improve the
economic value of the treaty, yielding domestic political benefits. If those
14
15

See Destler 1986; Destler and Odell 1987; Goldstein 1993; and Pastor 1980.
Downs and Rocke 1995, 77.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

339

benefits are sufficiently large, they may offset the potential costs of policy
constraints, making legalistic dispute settlement an attractive institutional
option.
There are several ways in which legalistic dispute settlement is likely to
enhance the level of compliance with international trade agreements.
When implementing reciprocal liberalization, trading states confront
problems of motivation and information.16 Each state knows its partners
may be motivated at times to violate their treaty commitments in order to
provide protection to domestic groups. Each state also knows that with
the prevalence and complexity of nontariff barriers, it may be difficult to
generate information about every instance of defection by its partners.
These transaction costs may prevent states from achieving mutually
beneficial gains from exchange. [International] institutions arise in part to
mitigate such costs by providing information about violations and in
some instances by enforcing commitments.17
Formal dispute settlement procedures serve these very functions. As
official forums where complaints are filed and judged, dispute settlement
mechanisms play an important role in monitoring treaty violations,
helping to offset problems of information. As independent bodies with
the authority to endorse sanctions against offenders, dispute settlement
mechanisms also help enforce treaty commitments, mitigating problems
of motivation. Trading states realize that agreements are valuable only if
compliance with their terms is high. *** The more legalistic the mechanism
– in other words, the more effectively and impartially it identifies violations
and enforces third-party rulings – the higher the likely level of government
compliance.18
In addition to monitoring and enforcing compliance, dispute settlement procedures also serve to define compliance, clarifying the meaning
of the treaty in disputes over how to interpret its terms. [Dispute] settlement operates in this respect as a type of relational contract.19 Because the
parties to a trade agreement cannot foresee all possible contingencies,
they find it very difficult ex ante to define compliance. The accord they
negotiate is inevitably incomplete; it does not specify how the parties
are to behave under all possible circumstances. As circumstances change,
conflicts of interpretation may arise. To avoid such conflicts, parties agree in
16
17
18

19

See Yarbrough and Yarbrough 1990; and Milgrom and Roberts 1992.
Keohane 1984.
Economists have sought to demonstrate the benefits of third-party trade dispute
settlement with formal models. See Maggi 1996; and Kovenock and Thursby 1994.
Milgrom and Roberts 1992, chap. 5.

340

International Law and International Relations

relational contracts to assign rights and responsibilities to define compliance, a role that trade accords often confer on impartial third parties.20
Finally, legalistic dispute settlement also improves the expected value
of reciprocal trade pacts through its impact on the behavior of private
traders and investors. For political leaders to realize fully the benefits of
liberalization, private sector actors must believe that having committed
specific assets to production for (or sales in) foreign markets, they will
not be denied access to that market. Traders and investors are risk-averse
with respect to decisions about investment, production, and distribution
involving assets that are highly specific – in other words, assets that are
costly to convert to other uses.21 Other things being equal, they prefer
minimum uncertainty, prizing a stable policy environment in which to
assess alternative business strategies.22 Legalistic dispute settlement serves as an institutional commitment to trade liberalization that bolsters
the confidence of the private sector, reducing one source of risk. The private sector thus increases the volume of trade and investment among the
parties, amplifying the macroeconomic – and, in turn, political – benefits
of liberalization.
* * *

Assessing the Trade-off
Political leaders negotiating the design of dispute settlement always
confront this tension between policy discretion and treaty compliance.
The trade-off between these objectives is universal, but not uniform.
Different governments assess it in dissimilar ways. And the weight a specific government assigns to each objective changes in different settings, as
does the probability that its preferred mechanism will be adopted. In
specifying the dimensions of variance, it is helpful to distinguish two stages
in the process of dispute settlement design. The first is national preference
formation; the second, international bargaining.23
20
21

22

23

See Garrett and Weingast 1993; and Weingast 1995.
Not all assets, obviously, are specific. For a discussion, see Frieden 1991, 434–40, who
builds on the pioneering work of Oliver Williamson. Williamson 1985.
Not all firms prefer stable, liberal trade policy to the prospect of future protection.
Firms close to insolvency or in sectors with low productivity are likely to prefer trade
policy discretion – and the increased probability of protection – to legalistic dispute
settlement.
This distinction follows Moravcsik 1993, 480–82.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

341

The level of legalism preferred by a particular government in a specific
trade negotiation depends on several factors. The first is the extent to
which its economy depends on trade with other signatories to the accord.
The more trade-dependent the economy, measured as the ratio of intrapact exports to gross domestic product (GDP), the more legalistic the
dispute settlement mechanism its government will tend to favor. Legalistic
dispute settlement is more valuable politically where trade with prospective
partner countries accounts for a larger share of the domestic economy.
A second source of dispute settlement preferences is relative economic
power. The more powerful the country in relative terms, the less legalistic the
dispute settlement mechanism its government will favor. This hypothesis
derives from the distinction between rule-oriented and power-oriented
dispute settlement.24 Rule-oriented systems resolve conflicts by developing
and applying consistent rules to comparable disputes, enabling less powerful
parties to win independent legal rulings that may be costly for more
powerful parties to ignore. For small countries, the benefits of such rulings
may outweigh the costs of diminished policy discretion. In power-oriented
systems, parties resolve disputes through traditional diplomatic means of
self-help, such as issue-linkage, hostage taking, and in particular the threat of
retaliatory sanctions.25 These strategies systematically favor more powerful
countries, which tend to favor pragmatism over legalism. A telling measure
of relative economic power within regional trade accords is each country’s
share of total pact GDP. The larger the country’s economy in relative terms,
the more influence it is likely to wield as the destination of imports from
other signatories. Larger economies also tend to be less dependent on
exports, giving their leaders diplomatic leverage in trade disputes.26
A third factor shaping dispute settlement preferences is the proposed
depth of liberalization. Trade agreements come in a variety of forms, and
the type of agreement at hand influences the type of dispute settlement
system favored by member governments. In particular, the more ambitious the level of proposed integration, the more willing political leaders
should be to endorse legalistic dispute settlement. One reason is that deeper
integration promises to generate larger net economic gains.27 A second
24

25
26
27

For discussions of this distinction, which is also cast as ‘‘pragmatism’’ versus ‘‘legalism,’’
see Dam 1970, 3–5; Hudec 1971, 1299–1300, 1304; and Jackson 1979.
Yarbrough and Yarbrough 1986.
Alesina and Wacziarg 1997.
The same logic applies to the breadth of trade pacts: where coverage is comprehensive,
excluding no major export sectors, political leaders are more likely to endorse legalism
than in pacts that exempt significant sectors.

342

International Law and International Relations

consideration is that legalism, viewed from a functional perspective, may
be the most appropriate institutional design for the resolution of disputes
in the process of deep integration, which includes coverage of complex
nontariff barriers to trade and common regulatory regimes. *
Together these simple measures – intrapact trade dependence, relative
economic power, and depth of liberalization – provide a way of specifying
dispute settlement preferences ex ante. To specify outcomes, one must
also identify which country’s preferences – given divergent ideal points on
the Pareto frontier of trade cooperation28 – should prevail at the
bargaining stage. Like most international treaty negotiations, trade talks
require consensus. In the presence of a unanimity rule, the design of
dispute settlement is likely to be only as legalistic as the signatory that
most values policy discretion and least values treaty compliance will
allow. The lowest common denominator drives the institutional outcome
when all parties have a unit veto.
In trade negotiations, one proxy for legalism’s lowest common denominator is intrapact economic asymmetry. Its utility lies in the fact that
larger economies stand to gain less, in proportional terms, from regional
liberalization than smaller economies. Within a given agreement, the
largest economies – defined in terms of aggregate GDP – traditionally
represent the most valuable potential markets for intrapact exports.29
Larger economies also are less dependent on and less open to trade – with
openness measured either in terms of policy measures or as the ratio of
trade to GDP – than smaller economies.30 [The] benefits of openness to
trade, measured in terms of the impact on per capita GDP growth rates,
diminish as aggregate GDP increases.31 [Hence] the relative value of liberalization – and, by implication, of legalistic dispute settlement – is usually
lower to larger economies than to smaller economies. The signatory state
with the largest economy, therefore, is most likely to wield the unit veto
that determines the level of legalism in a given agreement.

28
29

30

31

Krasner 1991.
For this observation to hold, per capita income levels should be comparable across
member countries. Most regional trade pacts between 1957 and 1995 have been
exclusively among either developed or developing countries, with NAFTA as the first
of few exceptions.
Alesina and Wacziarg report a strong negative correlation between country size and
openness to trade. Alesina and Wacziarg 1997. This finding is robust across multiple
measures of both variables, but of particular relevance to this study is their analysis of size
based on the log of aggregate GDP.
Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg 1997.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

343

This analysis leads one to expect less legalistic dispute settlement in
accords between parties whose relative economic size and bargaining
leverage are highly unequal. In pacts where a single member country is
much larger than its partners – in other words, where intrapact economic
asymmetry is high – the regional hegemon, whose economy stands to gain
least from trade liberalization, has little incentive to risk its policy discretion on behalf of improved treaty compliance. Moreover, this hegemon
also has the bargaining leverage to impose its preference for a pragmatic,
power-oriented system, under which it can more effectively use unilateral
trade measures. In other words, size matters – and significant disparities in
relative economic position augur poorly for legalism. Legalistic dispute
settlement is expected only in accords among parties whose relative size
and bargaining leverage are more symmetric. In settings of low economic
asymmetry – provided the proposed liberalization is sufficiently deep –
all member governments have an incentive to improve treaty compliance
through the use of impartial third parties. Given their comparable economic power ex ante, no signatory stands to lose bargaining leverage ex
post from the transition to a legalistic system. The projected gains from
liberalization must be significant, however, if political leaders are to
compromise their policy discretion. If the level of integration is not
ambitious – or if the pact exempts crucial export sectors – officials may
very well reject legalism even in settings of low asymmetry.
* * *

the data set
Among advanced industrial and developing countries alike, regional trade
integration has been a persistent feature of the world economy in recent
decades. Counts vary, but no fewer than sixty regional trade arrangements, established through formal treaties, have come into being since
1957.32 ***
Despite the general trend toward formal economic integration, these
trade pacts differ on many dimensions[: size, members’ level of economic
development, the scope or depth of liberalization, levels of compliance,
and durability.]
32

In 1994 the International Monetary Fund compiled a list of more than sixty-eight
regional agreements. An earlier study listed thirty-four existing and nineteen prospective
arrangements. See IMF 1994; and de la Torre and Kelly 1992.

344

International Law and International Relations

With such a diverse set of possible cases, it has been necessary to apply
certain criteria to ensure comparability. In this study there are no restrictions on the number of signatories, though I do exclude GATT and
the World Trade Organization – which stand alone as the world’s
only multilateral trade institutions ***. Similarly, there are no categorical
restrictions on the type of agreement, with free trade areas, customs
unions, common markets, and economic unions all represented. Finally, to
minimize selection bias, the data set includes both successful and failed
pacts. *** Despite these inclusive rules, trade agreements that failed
to meet one or more of the following requirements did not qualify for
this study.
First, liberalization must be reciprocal. Concessions need not be strictly
equivalent or simultaneous. *** But at least among some core signatories,
reciprocal market access must be the rule. ***
Second, liberalization must be relatively comprehensive in scope. Universal free trade, with no sectoral exceptions at all, is by no means required.
Still, coverage of at least merchandise trade must in principle be broad. ***
Third, the trade pacts must have been signed between January 1957
and December 1995. Negotiations that did not produce specific liberalization commitments by the end of 1995 are excluded. Pacts in which
implementation was at that point incomplete but in which liberalization
had begun are incorporated. ***
Table 14.2 lists the sixty-two trade agreements that met these criteria. It
also lists the year in which each treaty was signed and all member
governments, identifying those governments that were not among the
original signatories by indicating their years of accession in parentheses.
Countries that signed but later withdrew from the agreement are noted,
as are their years of departure. Appendix B lists the treaties from the
relevant time period that failed to meet one of the first two criteria listed
earlier, as well as those whose texts were for various reasons unavailable.
As Table 14.2 suggests, one potential problem in the data set is a lack of
independence among certain cases. There are four clusters of agreements,
one in the Americas and three in Europe, within which the timing and
terms of the accords are rather similar. So as not to exacerbate this
problem, I exclude treaties that were later encompassed or superceded by
subsequent agreements; examples include the Canada–U.S. Free Trade
Agreement and various bilateral pacts between the EC and individual
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries, almost all of which
were replaced either by accession to the EC or by membership in the
European Economic Area (EEA).

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

345

table 14.2. Data Set of Selected Regional Trade Agreements, 1957–95

Pact

Year
signed

Membersa

AFTA (ASEAN Free
Trade Area)

1992

Andean Pact

1969

ANZCERTA (Australia–
New Zealand Closer
Economic Relations
Trade Agreement)
Baltic Free Trade
Agreement
CACM (Central
American Common
Market)

1983

Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Brunei, Vietnam
(1995), Laos (1997), Burma
(1997)
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador,
Peru, Venezuela (1973)
(Chile withdrew
in 1976)
Australia, New Zealand

1993

Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania

1960

CARICOM (Caribbean
Community)

1973

CEAO (West African
Economic Community)
(dissolved in 1994)
CEEC (Central and East
European Country)
Pacts (5)
Bulgaria–Czech
Republic Free Trade
Agreement

1973

El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa
Rica (1963) (Honduras
withdrew in 1970 but
rejoined in 1990)
Antigua and Bermuda,
Barbados, Belize, Dominica,
Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica,
Montserrat, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines,
Suriname (1995), Trinidad
and Tobago (Bahamas is a
member of the Community
but not of the Common
Market)
Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory
Coast, Mali, Mauritania,
Niger, Senegal

1995

Bulgaria, Czech Republic

(continued)

346

International Law and International Relations
table 14.2 (continued)

Pact
Bulgaria–Slovak
Republic Free Trade
Agreement
Hungary–Slovenia
Free Trade Agreement
Romania–Czech
Republic Free Trade
Agreement
Romania–Slovak
Republic Free Trade
Agreement
CEFTA (Central
European Free Trade
Agreement)
Chile and Mexico
Pacts (9)
Chile–Bolivia Free
Trade Agreement
Chile–Canada Free
Trade Agreement
Chile–Colombia
Free Trade
Agreement
Chile–Ecuador Free
Trade Agreement
Chile–Venezuela Free
Trade Agreement
Mexico–Bolivia Free
Trade Agreement
Mexico–Chile Free
Trade Agreement
Mexico–Costa Rica
Free Trade
Agreement
Group of Three Free
Trade Agreement

Year
signed

Membersa

1995

Bulgaria, Slovak Republic

1994

Hungary, Slovenia

1994

Romania, Czech Republic

1994

Romania, Slovak Republic

1992

Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Slovakia,
Slovenia (1996),
Romania (1997)

1993

Chile, Bolivia

1995

Chile, Canada

1993

Chile, Colombia

1994

Chile, Ecuador

1991

Chile, Venezuela

1994

Mexico, Bolivia

1991

Mexico, Chile

1994

Mexico, Costa Rica

1994

Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

Pact

Year
signed

CIS (Commonwealth of
Independent States)

1993

COMESA (Common
Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa)

1993

EAC (East African
Community) (collapsed
in 1977; dissolved in
1984)
EC (European Community)

1967

EC Associations (12)
EC–Bulgaria Association
Agreement
EC–Cyprus Association
Agreement
EC–Czech Republic
Association
Agreement

347

Membersa
Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Armenia, Belarus, Georgia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Moldova, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan
(Ukraine is a full member
of the CIS but an associate
member of the Economic
Union)
Angola, Burundi, Comoros,
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Rwanda, Somalia,
Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zaire (1994),
Zambia, Zimbabwe
(Seychelles signed the treaty
but does not participate)
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda

1957

Austria (1995), Belgium,
Denmark (1973), Finland
(1995), France, Germany,
Greece (1981), Ireland
(1973), Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal
(1986), Spain (1986),
Sweden (1995), United
Kingdom (1973)

1993

EC, Bulgaria

1972

EC, Cyprus

1991

EC, Czech Republic

(continued)

348

International Law and International Relations
table 14.2 (continued)

Pact
EC–Estonia Free
Trade Agreement
EC–Hungary
Association
Agreement
EC–Poland Association
Agreement
EC–Romania
Association
Agreement
EC–Slovak Republic
Association Agreement
EC–Turkey Customs
Union
EC–Latvia Free
Trade Agreement
EC–Lithuania Free
Trade Agreement
EC–Malta Association
Agreement
EC–Israel Free Trade
Agreement
ECOWAS (Economic
Community of
West African States)
(revised in 1993)

Year
signed

Membersa

1994

EC, Estonia

1991

EC, Hungary

1991

EC, Poland

1993

EC, Romania

1991

EC, Slovak Republic

1963

EC, Turkey

1994

EC, Latvia

1994

EC, Lithuania

1970

EC, Malta

1995

EC, Israel

1975

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape
Verde, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Ivory Coast, Liberia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo
EC, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Norway (Swiss voters
rejected the EEA in 1992;
Austria, Finland, and
Sweden joined EC in 1995)
Iceland (1970), Liechtenstein
(1991), Norway,
Switzerland (United
Kingdom and Denmark
withdrew in 1973; Portugal
in 1986; Austria, Finland
(1986), and Sweden in
1994)

EEA (European
Economic Area)

1992

EFTA (European Free
Trade Association)

1960

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

Pact
EFTA Agreements (12)
EFTA–Bulgaria
Agreement
EFTA–Czech Republic
Agreement
EFTA–Estonia
Agreement
EFTA–Hungary
Agreement
EFTA–Israel
Agreement
EFTA–Latvia
Agreement
EFTA–Lithuania
Agreement
EFTA–Poland
Agreement
EFTA–Romania
Agreement
EFTA–Slovak
Republic
Agreement
EFTA–Slovenia
Agreement
EFTA–Turkey
Agreement
GCC (Gulf Cooperation
Council)

Year
signed

349

Membersa

1993

EFTA, Bulgaria

1992

EFTA, Czech Republic

1995

EFTA, Estonia

1993

EFTA, Hungary

1992

EFTA, Israel

1995

EFTA, Latvia

1995

EFTA, Lithuania

1992

EFTA, Poland

1992

EFTA, Romania

1992

EFTA, Slovak Republic

1995

EFTA, Slovenia

1991

EFTA, Turkey

1981

Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United
Arab Emirates
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea
(joined after 1974)
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay,
Uruguay (Chile and Bolivia
are associate members)
Canada, Mexico, United States

Mano River Union

1973

MERCOSUR (Common
Market of the South)

1991

NAFTA (North
American Free Trade
Agreement)

1992

(continued)

350

International Law and International Relations
table 14.2 (continued)
Year
signed

Pact
OECS (Organization of
East Caribbean States)

1981

SACU (Southern African
Customs Union)
U.S.–Israel Free Trade
Agreement
UDEAC (Central
African Customs and
Economic Union)

1969

a

1985
1964

Membersa
Antigua and Bermuda,
Dominica, Grenada,
Montserrat, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines
Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia,
South Africa, Swaziland
Israel, United States
Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Republic of
Congo, Gabon, Equatorial
Guinea

Dates in parentheses indicate years of accession for member states that were not among
the original signatories. Countries that signed but later withdrew from the agreement are
also noted, as are their years of departure.

overview of regional dispute settlement
In this segment I summarize the level of legalism in each of the regional
trade pacts in the data set. The basic features of dispute settlement in each
pact are highlighted in Table 14.3, which draws on the treaty texts listed
in Appendix A. Related agreements in Europe and the Americas are
aggregated; within each group, dispute settlement provisions are identical
in every important respect. I include two observations for EFTA, whose
membership changed significantly over time (see Table 14.2) and whose
1960 dispute settlement system was transformed with the creation of the
EEA in 1992. *** In this respect, EFTA is an exception to the rule. There
are a handful of other agreements whose dispute settlement procedures
changed over time – namely the Andean Pact, Central American Common
Market (CACM), Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR), AFTA,
and a few bilateral EFTA agreements. Unlike EFTA, however, these
cases have not undergone radical changes in membership or in other
variables of interest to this study. As a result, I report and evaluate their
most recent dispute settlement design (citations for the relevant agreements are listed in Appendix A).
Table 14.3 underscores the dramatic extent of institutional variation
in the data set. Its final column organizes the agreements into five clusters

351

EFTA agreements
with Czech
Republic,
Hungary,
Poland, Romania,
Slovak Republic,
and Turkey
Mano River Union
SACU
UDEAC
AFTA

ANZCERTA
Baltic FTA
CEEC Pacts (5)
CEFTA
EEA

Pact

None
None
None
Yes – automatic

None
None
None
None
None – unless
by mutual consent
to ECJ on EC law
None

Third-party
review

—
—
—
Not binding
(ministers
‘‘consider’’
report in vote)

—

—
—
—
—
—

Third-party
ruling

—
—
—
Ad hoc – roster

—

—
—
—
—
—

Judges

Treaty provision

—
—
—
States only

—

—
—
—
—
—

Standing

table 14.3. Levels of Legalism in Dispute Settlement Designa

—
—
—
Compensation,
sanctions
(only by vote
of Council)

—

—
—
—
—
—

Remedy

(continued)

None
None
None
Low

None

None
None
None
None
None

Level of
legalism

352

Yes – but only by
majority vote
of Council
Yes – but only by
vote of Council

Yes – automatic

Yes – automatic

Yes – but risk of
deadlock at
panel formation
Yes – but risk of
deadlock at
panel formation

EFTA 1960

U.S.–Israel Pact

Chile and Mexico
Pactsb (9)

EC associations
(12)

EC–Israel Pact

GCC

Yes – automatic

Third-party
review

CARICOM

Pact

Binding

Binding

Not binding (Council
‘‘may’’ vote to
recommend)
Not binding (Council
‘‘may’’ vote to
recommend)
Not binding
(panel issues
recommendation
to Supreme Council)
Not binding (merely
a conciliation
report)
Binding

Third-party
ruling

States only

Ad hoc – roster

Ad hoc

Ad hoc

Ad hoc – roster

States and EC

States and EC

States only

States only

States only

Ad hoc

Ad hoc

States only

Standing

Ad hoc – roster

Judges

Treaty provision

table 14.3 (continued)

None

Sanctions(‘‘any
appropriate
measure’’)
Sanctions (if
prescribed or
authorized)
None

Sanctions (only
by vote
of Council)
Sanctions (only
by vote
of Council)
None

Remedy

Medium

Medium

Medium

Low

Low

Low

Low

Level of
legalism

353

OECS

Yes – automatic

Yes – automatic
EFTA agreements
with Bulgaria,
Israel, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania,
and Slovenia
MERCOSUR
Yes – but only
after three
preliminary
reviews
NAFTA
Yes – automatic
(except in side
accords, where
two of three
states must
approve
review)

States only

Chap. 20:
states only
Chap 11:
individuals
only
Chap. 19
and
side
accords:
states and
individuals

Ad hoc – roster

Chap. 20 general
disputes: not
binding (contrary
settlement or
compensation
allowed)
Chap. 19 unfair trade
law and Chap. 11
investment disputes:
binding
Side accords on labor
and environment:
binding
Binding
Ad hoc – roster

States only

Ad hoc – roster

Binding

States only

Ad hoc

Binding

(continued)

Medium

Medium
Chap. 20:
sanctions
Chap. 11
and
Chap. 19:
direct
effect
Side accords:
fines (direct
effect for
Canada)

None

Medium

Medium

Sanctions

None

354

ECOWAS

Yes – automatic Binding

Yes – automatic Binding

Yes – automatic Binding

COMESA

EC

EFTA 1992

Standing tribunal States, treaty organs,
individuals
Standing tribunal States, treaty organs,
individuals
Standing tribunal States, treaty organs,
individuals
Standing tribunal States, treaty organs,
individuals
Standing tribunal States, treaty organs,
individuals

Standing tribunal States and
treaty organs

Standing

and

and

and

and

and

Direct effect

Sanctions (prescribed by
tribunal)
Direct effect

Sanctions
(imposed by heads of
state)
Direct effect, sanctions
(prescribed by tribunal)
Direct effect

None

None

None

Remedy

b

Boldface indicates the distinguishing features of cases at levels above and below medium legalism.
Several of the Chilean and Mexican pacts also include investor-state dispute mechanisms, rather like Chapter 11 of NAFTA.
Sources: See Appendix A.

a

Yes – automatic Binding

CACM

Andean Pact Yes – automatic Binding

Yes – automatic Binding

EAC

Standing tribunal States only

Standing tribunal States only

Binding
Yes – but
jurisdiction
limited
Yes – automatic Binding

CIS

Judges
Standing tribunal States only

Third-party
ruling

Yes – automatic Binding

Third-party
review

CEAO

Pact

Treaty provision

table 14.3 (continued)

Very High

Very High

Very High

Very High

Very High

High

High

High

High

Level of
legalism

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

355

that capture basic differences in the level of legalism. To define these
categories, I start with the most basic question: whether a treaty provides
any system of independent third-party review of disputes. For eighteen
treaties, the answer is no, and they thus constitute the lowest level of
legalism: none.33 At the next level, with low legalism, are five agreements
with dispute settlement mechanisms whose rulings are not binding in
international law. These pacts nominally provide a system of third-party
review but hold it hostage to decisions by political bodies, often a council
of ministers, or in the case of the U.S.–Israel accord treat its rulings as
mere recommendations.34
The midpoint of the sample – medium legalism – includes a diverse set
of thirty-one agreements that provide for some version of standard international arbitration, offering states an automatic right to binding rulings
by ad hoc arbitrators. Within this category there is variation regarding
remedies, since a few pacts provide for sanctions. The only agreements
with multiple dispute settlement procedures – NAFTA and several
pacts signed by Chile and Mexico – also fall into this category. NAFTA
includes at least five distinct mechanisms for different issue areas ***.35
The mechanism most relevant to this study, Chapter 20 for general
disputes, might qualify NAFTA at the level of low legalism because its
rulings are not legally binding: compensatory payments can substitute for
compliance, and disputants can reach a settlement contrary to the terms
of a panel ruling after it has been issued. However, NAFTA’s innovative
procedures for unfair trade law and investment disputes – which include
binding rulings and standing for individuals – push the agreement in
the direction of legalism. Without any standing tribunal, the combination
of these mechanisms arguably leaves NAFTA at the level of medium
legalism. Many of the Chilean and Mexican pacts incorporate a version
33

34
35

Inclusion of the EEA in this category may be controversial. Technically, all member states
of both EFTA and the EC have access to highly legalistic tribunals for the resolution of
disputes regarding issues of EC law, which the EEA extends to EFTA. Nevertheless, this
option applies only to disputes among EFTA states before the EFTA Court or among EC
states before the European Court of Justice. For disputes between the EC and EFTA,
neither group has automatic access to third-party review. By common consent, questions
of interpretation of EC law may be referred to the European Court of Justice, but EFTA
states have no direct access. Their complaints go instead to the EEA Joint Committee for
bilateral consultations between the EC Commission and the EFTA states ‘‘speaking with
one voice.’’ The original EEA draft proposed an EEA Court, but the European Court of
Justice struck it down as an usurpation of its exclusive authority over EC law. See
Bierwagen and Hull 1993, 119–24.
Azrieli 1993, 203–205.
For details on NAFTA’s different mechanisms, see Smith 1995.

356

International Law and International Relations

of NAFTA’s mechanism for investment disputes. Although this procedure
grants standing to individuals, it is limited in scope to rules on investment
and relies on ad hoc arbitrators, which keep the Chilean and Mexican
pacts within this category.
At the level of high legalism are four agreements that establish a standing
tribunal to issue binding rulings on cases brought by states. Although in other
respects these pacts resemble standard arbitration, the appointment of judges
to a permanent court implies a significant step in the direction of legalism.
These agreements create supranational institutions whose judges are likely to
issue consistent legal rulings in developing their treaty jurisprudence. In
practice, these four accords are among the most poorly implemented in the
data set. Both the East African Community (EAC) and the West African
Economic Community (CEAO), in fact, have been formally dissolved. The
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Community
Court of Justice awaits the realization of trade commitments in that largely
dormant economic area, while the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) Economic Court appears to be severely restricted
even among the CIS signatories that have endorsed it.36
There is a sizable leap toward legalism at the final level. All five agreements with very high legalism expand the definition of standing beyond
member states to include both treaty organs and private individuals.
With the exception of COMESA, they also give the rulings of standing
tribunals direct effect in national law. To a significant extent, the judicial
bodies envisaged for the CACM, Andean Pact, EFTA 1992, and COMESA
draw on the model of the European Court of Justice. For example, all
five tribunals have the authority, on request, to issue preliminary rulings
to national courts, which can serve to broaden the access of individuals
to supranational judicial review. On encountering questions of treaty
interpretation, domestic judges may or may not exercise this option,
but the preliminary question procedure has helped forge important
links between the European Court of Justice and national judiciaries
in Europe.37
* * *
36

37

Very little information is available, but reports suggest that the jurisdiction of the CIS
Economic Court has lawfully been refused by Kazakhstan. Three CIS members have not
recognized it, and others have ignored its rulings. See ‘‘CIS Court Dismisses Moldova
Claim for Kazakh Grain,’’ Reuter European Business Report, 6 February 1997; and ‘‘CIS
Economic Court to Be in Session,’’ TASS, 7 July 1997.
See Stone Sweet and Brunell 1998; and Mattli and Slaughter 1996.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

357

measuring asymmetry and proposed integration
To test my argument on the trade-off between treaty compliance and
policy discretion, I must find summary statistics that describe the level of
economic asymmetry and proposed depth of integration within each regional trade arrangement. Measuring GDP asymmetry in trade pacts is not
unlike measuring the level of industry concentration – or market share
asymmetry – in different sectors of the economy. A standard measure for
industrial concentration in economics is the Herfindahl-Hirschman index
(HH), which equals the sum of the squared market shares of the firms in
a given industry. In a situation of pure monopoly, the index is (1.0)2 5 1.00.
Where two firms divide the market evenly, HH 5 (0.5)2 1 (0.5)2 5 0.50.
In its traditional form, this index is not an ideal measure of intrapact
GDP asymmetry. In the two-firm example, a score of 0.50 – which is very
high by antitrust standards – for me represents a situation of perfect
symmetry if derived from a bilateral pact where the two countries have
identical GDP shares. Yet the same index score could reflect a situation
of high asymmetry in a pact with six signatories where the GDP shares
are as follows: HH 5 (0.68)2 1 (0.17)2 1 (0.10)2 1 (0.02)2 1 (0.02)2 1
(0.01)2 5 0.50. To correct for this problem, I subtract from the
Herfindahl-Hirschman index what the index would be in a situation of
perfect economic symmetry, where all signatories to a trade accord have
identical shares of the total pact GDP. Given the nature of summed
squares, this baseline of perfect symmetry always equals 1 divided by the
number of signatories (N). By subtracting it, I obtain a new measure (P)
that describes the proportional asymmetry of each pact. It captures the
distance of each pact from symmetry: the further a pact is from that
baseline, the higher the index. In the two-signatory example P would be
zero, indicating perfect symmetry, but in the six-signatory example it
would be much higher: P 5 0.50  (1/6) 5 0.33.
To define this proportional asymmetry index in more formal terms,
P5x2i  1=N for all i
where xi 5 each member’s share of total pact GDP, such that xi 5 1.
Among alternative indicators of inequality, P is related to variance
measures. In fact, P is formally equivalent to N times the variance of
income shares.38 In other words, P represents the sum of the squared
38

The variance of a given sample (Var) is the average squared deviation of data points from
their sample mean, which for income shares that sum to one is by definition 1/N: Var
ðxÞ5ð1=NÞ  ðxi 1=NÞ2.

358

High

Low

Asymmetry

1964
1992
1994
1994
1970
1995

1993
1981
1991
1960
1992
1992
1969
1973
1957
1994

Baltic FTA
OECS
Chile–Venezuela
CACM
AFTA
EFTA 1992
Andean Pact
CEAO
EC
Romania–Slovak Republic

UDEAC
CEFTA
Hungary–Slovenia
Chile–Ecuador
CARICOM
Bulgaria–Czech Republic

1973
1967
1994
1993
1995
1993

Year

Mano River Union
EAC
Romania–Czech Republic
Chile–Colombia
Bulgaria–Slovak Republic
COMESA

Pact

.47,
.53,
.74,
.77,
.48,
.79,

.16, .14, .13, .09, .01
.23, .17, .07
.26
.23
.31, .09, .05, .02, .01 and below
.21

.52, .48
.38, .34, .28
.545, .455
.55, .45
.57, .43
.11, .10, .10, .08, .07, .07, .06, .06, .06,
.05, .05, .04 and below
.45, .31, .23
.26, .22, .14, .12, .12, .10, .05
.61, .39
.38, .23, .19, .12, .08
.34, .27, .14, .13, .12, .01
.27, .26, .20, .14, .12, .01, .002
.34, .28, .27, .07, .04
.38, .19, .14, .09, .08, .08, .05
.36, .33, .18, .07, .06, .003
.69, .31

GDP shares (x)

table 14.4. The Proportional Asymmetry Index of Intrapact GDP Shares

6
4
2
2
12
2

3
7
2
5
6
7
5
7
6
2

2
3
2
2
2
22

N

.124
.112
.118
.134
.252
.162

.025
.032
.024
.053
.068
.073
.072
.076
.113
.069

.0007
.005
.004
.005
.011
.023

P

.149
.149
.235
.268
.275
.325

.037
.037
.048
.067
.082
.085
.089
.089
.136
.138

.001
.007
.008
.010
.021
.024

P/MAX

359

1960
1991
1981
1994
1975
1983
1993
1991
1995
1993
1992
1992
Various
1994
1994
1970
1995
1985
Various

.63, .12, .07, .05, .05, .04, .02
.65, .32, .02, .01
.67, .14, .11, .04, .03, .01
.75, .13, .12
.72, .07, .05, .04, .02 and below
.88, .12
.79, .06, .05, .04, .01 and below
.89, .11
.89, .11
.89, .11
.87, .08, .05
.91, .09
.96, .04
.98, .02
.99, .01
.984, .007, .005, .004
.99, .01
.99, .01
.99, .01

Note: Shares of GDP may not sum to 1 or match the index scores exactly because of rounding.
GDP shares 5 members’ GDP shares (xi) (in current $US) in reported year.
P 5  x2i  1/N for all i where xi is member i’s share of total pact GDP such that  xi 5 1.
MAX 5 1  1/N, the upper bound of P for each pact.
N 5 number of members at the time the agreement was signed.
a
GDP data for Guinea were unavailable.
b
Member states of the EC and/or EFTA act collectively as a unit in a bilateral governance structure.
Sources: World Bank (various years); OECD (various years); and UN Statistical Yearbook (various years).

EFTA 1960
MERCOSUR
GCC
Group of Three
ECOWAS
ANZCERTA
CIS
Mexico–Chile
Chile–Canada
Chile–Bolivia
NAFTA
EEA
EFTA Agreements (mean)
Mexico–Costa Rica
Mexico–Bolivia
SACU
EC–Israel
U.S.–Israel
EC Associations (mean)

7
4
6
3
15a
2
11
2
2
2
3
2b
2b
2
2
4
2b
2
2b

.281
.278
.313
.261
.458
.293
.540
.311
.311
.311
.430
.338
.421
.458
.472
.718
.479
.487
.490

.328
.371
.376
.392
.491
.586
.594
.622
.622
.622
.645
.676
.841
.916
.944
.957
.958
.974
.980

360

International Law and International Relations

deviation of individual GDP shares from their sample mean. One
disadvantage is that the upper bound (MAX) of P, which is equivalent
to 1  1/N, varies with the number of signatories. To control for differences in the maximum value of P, I use the ratio of the proportional
asymmetry index to its range (P/MAX).
To estimate the level of asymmetry within each accord, I use aggregate GDP figures denominated in U.S. dollars at current exchange rates.
Where possible the index uses data from the year in which the treaty was
signed.39 For all cases, the index incorporates only countries that signed
the accord at the time of its creation or reinvigoration; it excludes
member states that later acceded and includes any that later withdrew.
[EFTA] is the only pact to have duplicate entries. *** Other agreements
that underwent various changes over time *** hardly shifted in terms of
asymmetry and thus have one entry from the year of their establishment. *
Using these guidelines, Table 14.4 ranks and organizes the sixty-three
data points into two categories, low and high, based on the level of economic asymmetry within each pact. The rank order of the pacts derives
from their P/MAX scores, which are listed from low to high. To facilitate
comparisons, Table 14.4 reports the underlying GDP shares of signatories
to each agreement in descending order ***. These GDP shares make
evident the intuitive appeal of this ordering, but with a small sample size
and categorical dependent variable it is also necessary to draw a line
between low and high asymmetry. Although this P/MAX index captures
the level of asymmetry across all signatories, my theoretical approach
suggests that the relative size of the largest members may be more
important than the distribution of shares among smaller economies. The
reason is that two or three symmetrically positioned regional powers that
depend heavily on access to each others’ markets may endorse a legalistic
system even if the gap in size between them and their neighbors is
substantial.40 By focusing on the relative size of the largest signatories,
one can define a threshold between high and low asymmetry that
conforms to the rank order in Table 14.4. For bilateral pacts, if the larger
country’s share of GDP exceeds 70 percent, asymmetry is high, as it is in

39

40

The two exceptions are the 1973 CARICOM and the 1969 SACU, both of which reflect
GDP data from 1970.
For an argument along these lines regarding the critical role of the United States and the
European Union in the legalistic dispute settlement reforms of the Uruguay Round of
GATT, see Smith 1998.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

361

multilateral pacts where the GDP share of the largest signatory is more
than twice that of the next largest. ***
Like asymmetry, the proposed level of integration is a key variable that
requires a metric. An adapted version of the traditional concept of stages of
integration seems best able to capture the basic differences between shallow
and deep initiatives. In a study of regional trade pacts, the International
Monetary Fund labeled agreements as belonging to one of four categories.41
At the shallow end of integration arrangements are free trade areas, which
remove tariff and certain nontariff barriers ***. More ambitious are
customs unions, which in addition to free trade aim to establish harmonized external tariffs ***. Common markets aim to guarantee freedom of
movement not only for goods and services but also for factors of
production such as capital and labor. And at the deepest level of liberalization are economic unions, which are common markets whose member
states harmonize certain macroeconomic and regulatory policies.
Along the continuum of these four stages of integration, there is
a fundamental break between customs unions and common markets. Free
trade areas and customs unions focus on removing barriers to the crossborder movement of goods (and, at times, services), with an emphasis on
tariffs and quantitative restrictions. Common markets and economic
unions aim for a much higher level of integration, including the free
movement of labor and capital and the harmonization of economic
policies. *** Free trade areas and customs unions indicate low integration, whereas common markets and economic unions signify high integration. This typology reflects the proposed level of integration in each
agreement, not the extent of actual policy implementation.
With indicators for both asymmetry and integration, it is possible to
generate a third independent variable that represents their interaction. This
interaction term, of course, reflects my principal hypothesis – which is that
legalism is most likely where asymmetry is low and proposed integration is
high. *** Table 14.5 below summarizes all three variables for each
agreement.

asymmetry, proposed integration, and legalism
Tables 14.6, 14.7, and 14.8 summarize the relationship between legalism
and each of the three independent variables in turn: asymmetry, proposed

41

IMF 1994, 90.

362

International Law and International Relations

table 14.5. Legalism, Asymmetry, and Proposed Level of Integration
Legalism

Pact

None or SACU
low

Asymmetry

Integration

Interaction

High

High – common
market

High

UDEAC

High

High

ANZCERTA

High

EEA

High

CARICOM

High

GCC

High

EFTA–Israel

High

High – economic
union
High – common
marketa
High – common
market
High – common
market
High – common
market
Low – free trade area

High
High
High
High
Zero

EFTA–Bulgaria

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Estonia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Latvia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Lithuania

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Slovenia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Hungary–Slovenia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Bulgaria–Czech
Republic
U.S.–Israel

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA 1960

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Baltic FTA

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

CEFTA

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

Romania–Czech
Republic
Bulgaria–Slovak
Republic
Romania–Slovak
Republic
Mano River Union

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

Low

Low – customs union

Zero

AFTA

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

High

High – common market

High

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Medium MERCOSUR
EC–Israel

b

EC Associations (12)

High

Low – free trade areas

Zero

EFTA–Czech
Republic

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design
Legalism

High or
very
high

a

Pact

Asymmetry

363

Integration

Interaction

EFTA–Poland

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Hungary

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Romania

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

EFTA–Slovak
Republic
EFTA–Turkey

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

NAFTA

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Chile–Ecuador

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Group of Three

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Mexico–Chile

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Chile–Canada

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Chile–Bolivia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

Mexico–Costa
Rica
Mexico–Bolivia

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

High

Low – free trade area

Zero

OECS

Low

Low – customs union

Zero

Chile–Colombia

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

Chile–Venezuela

Low

Low – free trade area

Zero

CIS

High

High – economic union

High

ECOWAS

High

High – common market

High

CEAO

Low

High – economic union

Low

COMESA

Low

High – common market

Low

EAC

Low

High – common market

Low
c

CACM

Low

High – common market

Andean Pact

Low

High – common market

Low

Low

EC

Low

High – economic union

Low

EFTA 1992

Low

High – common market

Low

IMF (1994) codes ANZCERTA as a free trade area, but because it has achieved labor
mobility, full coverage of services, and a competition policy, it is much more like
a common market or, given the extent of legal harmonization, an economic union. See
Kahler 1995, 109–11.
b
The EC–Turkey agreement is a customs union.
c
IMF (1994) codes the CACM as a customs union. The members had accomplished little
more than a customs union at that point, but the aim of the treaty – as the name implies – is
clearly to establish a common market.
Sources: For treaty type, see IMF 1994, app. I; and WTO 1995.

364

International Law and International Relations
table 14.6. Legalism and Asymmetrya
Level of economic asymmetry

Level of legalism

Low

High

High or very
high

Total
9

CACM
Andean Pact
EC
EFTA 1992
COMESA
CEAO
EAC

CIS
ECOWAS

OECS
Chile–Colombia
Chile–Venezuela

MERCOSUR
Mexico Pacts (4)
Chile–Bolivia
Chile–Canada
Chile–Ecuador
NAFTA
EC–Israel
EC Associations (12)
EFTA–Czech Republic
EFTA–Poland
EFTA–Hungary
EFTA–Romania
EFTA–Slovak Republic
EFTA–Turkey

Baltic FTA
Romania–Czech Republic
Bulgaria–Slovak Republic
Romania–Slovak Republic
AFTA
Mono River Union

CARICOM
U.S.–Israel
EFTA 1960
EFTA–Israel
EFTA–Bulgaria
EFTA–Estonia
EFTA–Latvia
EFTA–Lithuania
EFTA–Slovenia

Medium

31

Low or none

23

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

365

Level of economic asymmetry
Level of legalism

Low

High

Total

EEA
CEFTA
Hungary–Slovenia
Bulgaria–Czech Republic
SACU
UDEAC
ANZCERTA
GCC
Total

16

47

63

Note: P (v2f2g. 17.08) 5 0.000.
Fisher’s exact 5 0.000.
Cramer’s V 5 0.52.
a
Cases that lie off the predicted diagonal at high and low levels of legalism are shown in italics.

integration, and their interaction. To facilitate analysis of the small sample
in this study, I collapse the five levels of legalism into three rows. ***
With a simplified dependent variable, it is possible to use chi-squared
tests of statistical significance. For all three independent variables, the null
hypothesis of independence can be rejected with very high levels of
confidence (p , .01), suggesting a significant relationship to legalism.42
To estimate the strength of that relationship, I also report Cramer’s V,
which for all three tables is relatively large (V . .5). The direction of
each variable’s effect on legalism is as expected: negative for asymmetry,
positive for proposed integration, and negative for their interaction, reflecting the impact of asymmetry where proposed integration is high. ***
The first hypothesis to evaluate is whether levels of asymmetry and
legalism are inversely related, given the preferences and negotiating
leverage of regional hegemons. In its strongest form, the implication is
that highly legalistic forms of dispute settlement should not occur in
highly asymmetric settings. The evidence supports this claim, as shown in
Table 14.6. Among the forty-seven cases of high asymmetry, there are
only two examples of highly legalistic dispute settlement. All five pacts
42

Given a sample size of sixty-three cases, the low expected frequencies of certain cells
imply that the use of Pearson’s chi-squared may be inappropriate. The reduced sample in
Table 14.8 is especially problematic. For this reason I also report Fisher’s exact, a more
conservative test designed for small samples.

366

International Law and International Relations
table 14.7. Legalism and Integration
Level of proposed integration

Level of legalism

Low

High

High or very high

Total
9

None

CACM
Andean Pact
EC
EFTA 1992
CIS
COMESA
CEAO
EAC
ECOWAS

Medium

31
OECS
Chile and Mexico Pacts (9)
NAFTA
EC–Israel
EC Associations (12)
EFTA–Czech Republic
EFTA–Poland
EFTA–Hungary
EFTA–Romania
EFTA–Slovak Republic
EFTA–Turkey

MERCOSUR

U.S.–Israel
AFTA
Mano River Union
Romania–Czech Republic
Bulgaria–Czech Republic
Romania–Slovak Republic
Bulgaria–Slovak Republic
Hungary–Slovenia
EFTA 1960
EFTA–Israel
EFTA–Bulgaria

CARICOM
EEA
SACU
ANZCERTA
GCC
UDEAC

Low or none

23

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

367

Level of proposed integration
Level of legalism

Low

High

Total

EFTA–Estonia
EFTA–Latvia
EFTA–Lithuania
EFTA–Slovenia
CEFTA
Baltic FTA
Total

47

16

63

2

Note: P (v f2g . 34.49) 5 0.000.
Fisher’s exact 5 0.000.
Cramer’s V 5 0.74.
a
Cases that lie off the predicted diagonal at high and low levels of legalism are shown in
italics.

with very high legalism are also cases of low asymmetry. And both anomalies with high legalism, the CIS and ECOWAS *** [– within which
Russia and Nigeria, respectively, are dominant – at this point remain far
from effective implementation, suggesting potential tension between the
structure of political power in these accords and their institutional
design.43]
Where asymmetry is low, high levels of legalism are expected only
where the proposed level of integration is high. The evidence supports this
claim as well. Six potentially anomalous cases italicized in Table 14.6
combine low asymmetry with low or no legalism, but all six treaties – four
of which are among formerly socialist countries in Europe – aim to establish no more than a free trade area or customs union. Despite conditions of
symmetry that might permit the adoption of rule-oriented dispute settlement, in these pacts governments have opted for relatively diplomatic
systems. If they commit to deeper liberalization in the future, member
states might endorse more legalistic dispute settlement. ***
A second test is for a positive relationship between the level of proposed
integration and legalism, which the evidence generally confirms, as shown
in Table 14.7. The majority of cases with low or high legalism fall on the
43

The CIS Economic Court, for example, has yet to be given effective powers. President
Lukashenka of Belarus has proposed reforming the CIS tribunal on the model of the
European Court of Justice. See BBC Summary of World Broadcasts SU/D3168/D, 6
March 1998. In ECOWAS, very little progress has been made on liberalization. See
‘‘Ecobank Boss Deplores Rivalry in ECOWAS,’’ Panafrican News Agency, 6 March 1999.

International Law and International Relations

368

table 14.8. Legalism and the Interaction of Asymmetry and Integrationa
Interaction of economic asymmetry
and proposed integration
Level of legalism

Low

High

High or very high

Total
9

CACM
Andean Pact
EC
EFTA 1992
COMESA
CEAO
EAC

CIS
ECOWAS

Medium

None

MERCOSUR

Low or none

None

1
6

CARICOM
EEA
SACU
UDEAC
ANZCERTA
GCC
Total

7

9

16

2

Note: P (v f2g . 9.68) 5 0.008.
Fisher’s exact 5 0.004.
Cramer’s V 5 0.78.
a
Cases where the interaction term is zero have been omitted to capture the impact of
asymmetry where proposed integration is high. Cases that lie off the predicted diagonal at
high and low levels of legalism are shown in italics.

predicted diagonal. No mere free trade agreements or customs unions have
embraced the concept of binding rulings by a standing tribunal of justices.
Only where the level of proposed integration is high, in the form of
a common market or economic union, have highly legalistic mechanisms been endorsed. Nevertheless, no fewer than six cases lie at the
intersection of ambitious integration and low or no legalism. In all six
agreements, the signatories have embraced the prospect of deep integration but rejected binding third-party review. In the EEA, Southern African
Customs Union (SACU), Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA), and Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC), member states have even managed to achieve considerable market

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

369

table 14.9. Ordered Probit Regression of Legalism
Variable

Coefficient

Standard error

Proposed integration
Economic asymmetry
Interaction
Number of observations
Log likelihood
Chi-squared
Significance

3.203**
1.067*
5.604**
63
49.59
26.16
0.000

0.682
0.484
1.483

** p , .01, two-tailed test.
* p , .05, two-tailed test.

integration in the absence of highly legalistic institutions – in three of these
cases without any system of third-party review at all.
These anomalous combinations of high integration and low legalism
share one telling attribute: all six treaties shown in italics in Table 14.6 are
cases of high asymmetry. This structural attribute – through its impact on
the domestic political economy of trade – appears to be one of the principal
reasons these deep integration initiatives have not adopted correspondingly legalistic dispute settlement mechanisms.[44] ***
The most robust predictor of dispute settlement design seems to be the
interaction of asymmetry and proposed integration. Where the level of
proposed integration is relatively low – implying a value of zero for the
interaction term – not a single treaty has approved a permanent court,
as noted in Table 14.7. By excluding those cases, Table 14.8 highlights
the impact of asymmetry where proposed integration is high. In this
subset of sixteen common markets and economic unions, the multiplicative interaction term assumes the value of the asymmetry index. Where
asymmetry is high, legalism is unlikely to be high even in cases where the
proposed integration is deep. At high values of the interaction term, as
Table 14.8 indicates, very few treaties endorse binding third-party review.
The CIS and ECOWAS again stand out as exceptions. Among cases with
low asymmetry, legalism is likely to be high only where policy goals
are ambitious and the potential value of liberalization is considerable. As
44

*** Predictably, the main obstacle to institutional reform in MERCOSUR is Brazil, by
far the largest signatory. During negotiations for a permanent dispute settlement
mechanism, Brazil rejected proposals by Uruguay and Argentina for a more legalistic
system. See Pastori 1994, 4–7; and O’Neal Taylor 1996, 87475.

370

International Law and International Relations

Table 14.8 reveals, where the interaction term is low – the most favorable
conditions for legalism, according to this framework – all seven treaties
have endorsed standing tribunals.
The dramatic impact of this interaction appears also in an ordered probit regression of legalism. Table 14.9 summarizes the results of this statistical test, which uses asymmetry and the interaction term as continuous
variables that range from zero to 1, capturing more variation than the
preceding tabular analysis. Proposed integration (low 5 0; high 5 1) and
legalism (none or low 5 0; medium 5 1; high or very high 5 2) remain
categorical variables. Despite the small sample size, which is not ideal
for maximum likelihood estimation, * both integration and the multiplicative interaction term exhibit highly significant and strong effects on
legalism.45 These effects, moreover, are in the predicted direction. The
coefficient of the interaction term is the largest in magnitude, indicating
the decisively negative relationship of asymmetry to legalism where the
level of proposed integration is high. *
This simple analytical framework, tested with basic indicators of GDP
concentration and treaty type, successfully accounts for thirty of the thirtytwo cases at the more extreme levels of legalism, where the implications of
the theory are clearest. ***
* * *

conclusion
In this article I offer a political theory of dispute settlement design in
international trade. My aim is to demonstrate and account for significant
variation in the level of legalism across different regional accords. With
a dual emphasis on economic asymmetry and the proposed depth of
integration, I predict the extent to which trading states will delegate
judicial review authority to impartial third parties. My central assertion is
that in drafting governance structures for international trade, political
leaders weigh the benefits of improved treaty compliance against the costs
of diminished policy discretion. To make this judgment, they assess their
45

In maximum likelihood analysis of small samples, positive findings of significance may be
more reliable than negative results. Hart and Clark report that in probit models of binary
dependent variables, the risk of false positive findings does not change appreciably as
sample size decreases. Hart and Clark 1999. They conclude that ‘‘the likelihood that
small samples will induce Type I errors is small,’’ in contrast to the substantial risk of false
negative findings.

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

371

economic stake in intrapact trade; their relative economic power vis-a`-vis
other parties to the accord; and the depth or intensity of the proposed
liberalization. Thanks to their market size and lesser dependence on trade,
relatively large countries tend to prefer less legalism than their smaller
counterparts. Because treaties require unanimity, the institutional preferences of larger countries tend to prevail in negotiations, defining the
lowest common denominator.
The implications of this approach – chief among which is that legalistic mechanisms are unlikely where asymmetry is high or integration is
shallow – stand up to empirical scrutiny against a sizable set of more than
sixty regional trade agreements. In almost every pact with high asymmetry,
legalism is absent – even, in contrast to functional accounts, where
integration is deep. Where asymmetry is low, legalism occurs only where
at least a common market, and not just free trade or a uniform external
tariff, is the ultimate policy objective. ***
Seen from a broad perspective, this theory of trade dispute settlement
design ostensibly relies on a hybrid of neoliberal institutionalist logic and
structural realist indicators of relative economic power. Unlike those
systemic approaches, however, it is grounded in a political calculation of
costs and benefits in the domestic arena, not in expectations about absolute
or relative gains internationally. Political leaders in this model are not
primarily focused on overcoming market failures or improving their
defensive positions in an anarchic international system, however germane
such considerations may be to the decision to pursue economic integration
in the first instance. Given a regional trade initiative, negotiations over
dispute settlement design in my view are driven by domestic political
concerns. Without delving into the particulars of comparative politics, my
analytical framework connects generic domestic political incentives to
issues of international institutional design, *** bridging the steadily receding divide between comparative and international political economy. *
* * *
[My] account privileges the moment of institutional creation, when
member states negotiate and establish a system for the resolution of disputes. This moment need not coincide with the signing of the initial treaty.
In a few pacts, such as the CACM, MERCOSUR, and AFTA, member
states adopted or amended their permanent dispute settlement mechanisms well after their commitments to liberalize trade. Like asymmetry
and the depth of integration, dispute settlement designs may change over
time, with one blueprint substituted for another as in EFTA. Within the

372

International Law and International Relations

parameters of that design, at every level of legalism, a range of behavioral
outcomes – from frequent use to utter irrelevance – are possible. Nevertheless, outcomes still remain subject to boundary conditions established by
the institutional blueprint of each treaty, rendering the basic design itself
worthy of investigation.

appendix a: sources for treaty texts
The date following the treaty title indicates the year the treaty was published.
The original signing date for each treaty can be found in Table 14.2.
AFTA (ASEAN Free Trade Area). 1992. International Legal Materials 31:506.
Protocol on Dispute Settlement Mechanism, available from the ASEAN Secretariat or online at ,http://www. asean.or.id/economic/dsm.htm..
Andean Pact. 1979. Treaty Creating the Court of Justice of the Cartagena
Agreement. International Lega Materials 18:1203.
Statute of the Court of Justice of the Cartagena Agreement, available from the
Organization of American States or online at ,http://www.sice.oas.org/
trade/junac/tribunal/cartage2.stm..
ANZCERTA (Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement). 1983. International Legal Materials 22:945.
Baltic Free Trade Agreement. Available from the foreign ministries of member
states.
CACM (Central American Common Market). 1994. Basic Documents of International Economic Law 2:529.
Statute of the Central American Court of Justice. 1995. International Legal
Materials 34:921.
CARICOM (Caribbean Community). 1974. United Nations Treaty Series 946:17.
New York: UN.
CEAO (West African Economic Community). 1981. United Nations Treaty Series
1257:362. New York: UN.
CEEC (Central and East European Country) Pacts. Available online at ,http://
www.wto.org/wto/online/ddf.htm..
CEFTA (Central European Free Trade Agreement). 1995. International Legal
Materials 34:3.
Chile and Mexico Pacts. Available from the Organization of American States or
online at ,http://www.sice.oas.org/trade.stm..
CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States). 1995. International Legal Materials
34:1279.
COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa). 1994. International Legal Materials 33:1067.
EAC (East African Community). 1967. International Legal Materials 6:932.
EC (European Community). Agreement Establishing the European Economic Community and Protocol on the Statute of the Court of Justice of the EEC. 1958.
United Nations Treaty Series 298:11, 147. New York: UN.
EC Associations. Available in Official Journal of the European Communities, or
online at ,http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/..

The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design

373

EC–Israel. 1996. Official Journal of the European Communities 39:1–11.
ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States). 1975. International
Legal Materials 14:1200. Revised Treaty. 1996. International Legal Materials
35:660.
Protocol A/P.1/7/91 on the Community Court of Justice. 1996. Revue Africaine de
Droit International et Compare 8:228.
EEA (European Economic Area). 1993. Common Market Law Reports 29:1247.
EFTA (European Free Trade Association). 1960. United Nations Treaty Series
370:5. New York: UN.
EFTA. 1994. Official Journal of the European Communities 37:1–83.
EFTA Associations. Available online at ,http://www.efta.int/docs/EFTA/LegalTexts/FTAs/FTAdefault.htm..
GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council). 1987. International Legal Materials 26:1131.
Mano River Union. 1974. United Nations Treaty Series 952:264. New York: UN.
MERCOSUR (Common Market of the South). 1991. International Legal Materials 30:1041. Protocol of Brasilia for the Settlement of Disputes. 1997.
International Legal Materials 36:691. Ouro Preto Protocol, available from
the Organization of American States or online at ,http://www.sice.oas.org/
trade/mrcsr/ourop/index.stm..
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement). 1993. International Legal
Materials 32:605.
OECS (Organization of East Caribbean States). 1981. International Legal
Materials 20:1166.
SACU (Southern African Customs Union). 1973. United Nations Treaty Series
860:69. New York: UN.
U.S.–Israel. 1985. International Legal Materials 24:654.
UDEAC (Central African Customs and Economic Union). 1964. International
Legal Materials 4:699.

appendix b: excluded regional economic
agreements, 1957–95
This list draws largely on de la Torre and Kelly 1992; IMF 1994; and WTO 1995.
These sources also include pacts that were superceded by subsequent agreements included in Table 14.2 or listed here.

Nonreciprocal Agreements
U.S. Caribbean Basin Initiative
EC Lome´ Conventions with African, Caribbean, and Pacific States
EC Cooperation Agreements with Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco,
Syria, and Tunisia
EFTA Cooperation Agreements with Albania, Egypt, and Tunisia
1976 Australia–Papua New Guinea Trade and Commercial Relations Agreement
1980 South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Agreement
1991 CARICOM–Venezuela Agreement
1991 CARICOM–Colombia Agreement

374

International Law and International Relations
Cooperation or Framework Agreements

1976 Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
1980 Latin American Integration Association
1983 Economic Community of Central African States
1984 Indian Ocean Commission
1985 Economic Cooperation Organization
1985 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (signed limited preferential trade pact in 1993)
1989 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum
1991 African Economic Community
1992 Southern African Development Community (signed free trade agreement in
1996)
1992 Black Sea Economic Cooperation Project
1994 Association of Caribbean States
1994 Free Trade Area of the Americas

Unavailable Agreements
1961 Borneo Free Trade Area
1962 African Common Market
1964 Arab Common Market
1975 Bangkok Agreement
1989 Arab Maghreb Union
1991 Thailand–Lao People’s Democratic Republic Trade Agreement
1992 Slovak Republic–Czech Republic Customs Union
1993 Slovenia–Czech Republic Free Trade Agreement
1993 Slovenia–Slovak Republic Free Trade Agreement
1994 Kazakhstan–Kyrgyz Republic–Uzbekistan Customs Union
1994 Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (renewal of
moribund 1964 UDEAC)
1994 West African Economic and Monetary Union (successor to dissolved 1973
CEAO)

15
Loosening the Ties that Bind: A Learning Model
of Agreement Flexibility
Barbara Koremenos

* * *
*** Existing international agreements are testament to states’ willingness
and ability to cooperate despite the international anarchy in which they
find themselves. Given the difficulties of cooperation under anarchy
documented in the recent international relations literature, understanding
how states manage to bring about the formal cooperation embodied in
international agreements is of both theoretical and practical interest.
States can make agreements more desirable in prospect and more robust
in practice by varying their provisions for duration and renegotiation. These
provisions help states account for the uncertain economic, political, and
technological contexts in which agreements are made and (ideally) kept.
* * *
Nevertheless, the issues of duration and renegotiation have been almost completely ignored in the political science literature on international
relations. They have been wholly neglected in theoretical studies of international cooperation, and there has been surprisingly little discussion
of these issues from an empirical point of view. In fact, although some
discussions of individual agreements cover the issues of duration and renegotiation for the agreement in question, no work exists that attempts

I thank Jeffrey Smith, James Fearon, Andrew Kydd, James Morrow, Charles Glaser, Duncan
Snidal, George Bunn, Richard Bilder, Brian Portnoy, Scott Mosier, T. Clifton Morgan,
Alan Stam, Jack Child, and workshop participants at University of Chicago (PIPES), the
Brookings Institution, and the Merriam Lab of the University of Illinois, Champagne-Urbana.
The comments of editors Peter Gourevitch and David Lake and those of three anonymous
referees greatly improved this article.

375

376

International Law and International Relations

to account for or even describe the observed patterns and variation in
agreement duration and renegotiation.1
* * *
What I am attempting essentially is to bring theory – in particular,
formal international relations theory – to international law. I argue that
uncertainty in the international environment – uncertainty that is of
varying forms and degrees across issue contexts – leads states to choose
particular duration and renegotiation provisions. These provisions, in
turn, affect whether or not states conclude international agreements and
whether or not they renege on them.2
This study is the first theoretical work to address the nominal (that is,
negotiated) length of international agreements.3 My theoretical work takes
as its departure the economic theory of contracts, since agreements are
essentially contracts between states, with the key difference that there is
no external authority available to enforce them. The economic literature
on contract duration formalizes the key trade-off in choosing contract
duration between the benefit associated with spreading the (assumed) fixed
cost of contracting over additional periods and the loss associated with
staying for additional periods in a suboptimal contract.4 This basic insight
is helpful but insufficient to explain the range of duration and renegotiation provisions present in even the small set of agreements I consider here.
My theory identifies key factors affecting the choices of duration and
renegotiation provisions in these agreements. The two most important factors are the degree of agreement uncertainty (formally, the variance of the
distribution of gains from an agreement) and the degree of noise in the
environment (formally, the variance of confounding variables whose effect
on outcomes may be confused with that of an agreement). The greater the
agreement uncertainty, the more likely states will want to limit the duration

1

2

3

4

One exception is Bilder, who surveys a number of techniques that states can use to help themselves manage the risks of international agreements. Bilder 1981. He identifies and devotes
two pages to the technique of ‘‘Limiting the Duration of the Agreement.’’ Also, Grieco mentions issues of agreement durability in his concluding chapter (see fn. 22 below). Grieco 1990.
Moreover, I would argue that renegotiation clauses (as well as other forms of flexibility
provisions like escape clauses) help reconcile the tension between two doctrines of international
law: rebus sic stantibus and pacta sunt servanda (treaties should be performed in good faith).
Two recent studies by Gaubatz and Bennett examine realized durations of alliances using
hazard-rate models. See Gaubatz 1996; and Bennett 1997. These studies ignore the fact
that many agreements are initially concluded with a finite duration. They therefore conflate
planned agreement terminations with those resulting from a violation of the agreement.
The three main papers are Gray 1978; Dye 1985; and Harris and Holmstrom 1987.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

377

of the agreement and incorporate renegotiation. The factor working against
renegotiation is noise. The greater the noise, the more difficult it is to learn
how an agreement is actually working; hence incorporating limited duration
and renegotiation provisions becomes less valuable.
The model provides a framework within which to discuss the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). I describe the basic features of the agreement and summarize the available information about how the parties
themselves framed the duration and renegotiation issues while negotiating the agreement. ***
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In the second
section I develop a formal model in which an agreement characterized by
uncertainty may be renegotiated to incorporate new information. The
uncertainty is related to the division of gains under the agreement, with the
parties resolving this uncertainty over time as they gain experience with the
agreement. This form of uncertainty corresponds to the uncertainty
experienced by the parties to the international agreement I discuss in
detail in the third section. *** In the fifth section I offer conclusions.

model: learning about the workings of an agreement
* * *
In this model an agreement is like an experience good in which a complete
knowledge of the effects of the good is gained only by using it. Over time, by
observing the outcomes obtained under the agreement and attempting to
distinguish the once-and-for-all effects of the agreement from the normal
period-to-period fluctuation in outcomes, the parties come to learn with increasing precision the true distribution of benefits created by the agreement.5
5

There are other forms of uncertainty, and, importantly, states respond to these with alternative flexibility provisions. For example, in the context of economics agreements, the
uncertainty is often persistent; states cannot learn once and for all about the division of
gains from an agreement because that division is subject to repeated shocks. In such a case,
states may follow the example of the G5 finance ministers and have a series of finiteduration agreements with renegotiation in between. Koremenos 1999. In a recent study I
consider the same environment but with a large number of parties. Koremenos 2000. In
such a case renegotiation costs may be prohibitive (since they rise with the number of parties). Hence parties may choose to establish an institution (like the IMF) empowered to adjust the terms of the agreement in response to the repeated shocks. Bordo and Kydland’s
work on escape clauses during the gold standard addresses a different type of uncertainty:
political shocks, such as wars and banking panics. Bordo and Kydland 1995 and 1996. Such
uncertainty leads states to incorporate ‘‘suspension’’ mechanisms instead of ‘‘adjustment’’
mechanisms. Downs and Rocke and Rosendorff and Milner consider similar models in a
trade context. See Downs and Rocke 1995; and Rosendorff and Milner [2002].

378

International Law and International Relations

How can states make use of what they learn about the distribution of
gains from the agreement? They may choose to make their initial agreement of finite duration, and then ‘‘re’’negotiate a new agreement when the
first one comes to a close. If they do so, they can use the information they
have gained through their experience under the agreement to realign the
division of gains in the renegotiated agreement. Under certain conditions
(made precise below) this planned renegotiation and realignment reduces
ex ante uncertainty and thereby raises the expected utility of the parties.
Put another way, careful selection of the duration and renegotiation provisions allows the parties to conclude efficient agreements (ones that
increase the size of the pie available to the parties) that otherwise might
fail because of distributional problems.
Of course, states may also be uncertain about the absolute level of
gains from a potential agreement. In this analysis I focus solely on distributional uncertainty. My justification is both theoretical and empirical.
Uncertainty about the absolute level of gains is probably at least as pervasive as distributional uncertainty. However, what would make absolute
uncertainty interesting from the viewpoint of cooperation theory is if its
presence precluded any agreement at all. In other words, are there many
cases in which there was substantial uncertainty about whether an agreement would produce a net gain and hence in which provisions for limited
duration and renegotiation made cooperation possible? The one issue
area for which absolute uncertainty might play such a role is the environment. Nonetheless, in that issue area, questions of distribution also loom
large.6 In any event, the distribution question seems at least as important
empirically and much more interesting theoretically.7
Assumptions
The following assumptions underlie the model:
States care about the future – that is, their discount factor is not zero.
States are risk averse.
There is uncertainty about future states of the world.
6

7

For example, writing about the Convention on Biological Diversity, Raustiala argues
that the convention ‘‘addressed three (linked) central concerns: the conservation of
biodiversity, the promotion of sustainable use, and the equitable sharing of benefits. It is
this latter objective, with its clear redistributive implications, that was and remains the
cause of much debate.’’ Raustiala 1997, 491.
See also fn. 12 below.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

379

The costs of making agreements completely contingent are sufficiently
large that the parties do not ever choose to do so.8
There are costs to negotiating (and renegotiating) agreements.
There are costs to reneging on agreements.
States have shared a priori beliefs about the information they do not
possess, and they revise their beliefs according to Bayesian logic as
their interactions evolve.9
* * *
Consider the role each assumption plays. If states did not care about
the future, they would not bother to conclude agreements. If states were
not risk averse, they would always conclude indefinite agreements in order
to avoid paying renegotiation costs and would not care ex ante about how
much the distribution of gains might differ from that originally agreed
upon. If there were no uncertainty about future states of the world, there
would be no additional information to incorporate through renegotiation, and all agreements would be indefinite in order to economize on
renegotiation costs. If agreements could be made perfectly contingent on
the realized state of the world, states would do so and thereby save on
renegotiation costs by eliminating the need for renegotiation. If negotiation and renegotiation were costless, states would renegotiate every time
new information arrived, and all agreements would be of short duration.
If reneging were costless, states would renege often (assuming renegotiation costs were not too high) and would be less likely to adopt finiteduration agreements. Instead, they would use reneging as a form of
contingent renegotiation within indefinite-duration agreements.
Basics of the Model
There are two prospective parties to the agreement. In the absence of an
agreement, each party obtains an outcome every period. This outcome
depends on the particular context, but it could represent something like
GNP or some measure of military security. Each party has an expectation
about what its outcome will be every period – for example, state 1 expects
its GNP to be $1 trillion. This is the party’s base outcome. Of course, the
actual outcome will rarely, if ever, correspond exactly to the base. The
8

9

For a justification of this assumption in the context of the economics literature on incomplete contracts, see the discussion in Hart and Holmstrom 1987.
In Knightian terms, the parties face risk, not uncertainty.

380

International Law and International Relations

actual outcome will consist of the base plus or minus some amount. For
example, state 1’s actual GNP might be $0.9 trillion or $1.1 trillion. I refer
to this unanticipated variation as the outcome shock or noise.
I assume the agreement yields a total gain that is known at the time
the agreement is concluded. What is not known at that time is how this
gain will accrue to the two parties in practice. I assume that the parties can
set the expected value of the two shares in the initial agreement.
The division of the gain agreed upon in the initial agreement reflects
the relative bargaining power of the two parties. For example, suppose
that states 1 and 2 have equal bargaining power and they conclude
a joint research venture that will result in a total profit of $25 billion.
What cannot be known in advance is exactly how whatever technology
emerges from the venture will benefit industry in each of the two states.
Initially, each state invests an equal amount, and the parties set the
expected gain to be the same for both states, $12.5 billion.
The basic problem facing the parties to an agreement in this model is to
sort out the effects of the agreement from other random fluctuations
in outcomes. For example, suppose that, after the joint venture is concluded, state 1’s GNP is $1.05 trillion. How can state 1 know how much (if
any) of the $50 billion increase in GNP results from the joint venture and
how much results from an agricultural boom spawned by favorable
weather? The answer is that it cannot know exactly, but it can learn
over time.
The states face a choice between an agreement of indefinite duration
and one finite-duration agreement followed by an agreement of indefinite
duration. In the simple two-period case I consider formally, the choice
becomes one two-period agreement with no renegotiation or two oneperiod agreements with renegotiation in between to realign the distribution of gains.
Renegotiation takes place whenever a finite-duration agreement comes
to an end. Thus the reservation outcome for both parties in the renegotiation consists of the no-agreement outcome. Essentially, the parties are in
the same situation with renegotiation as in the original negotiation except
that they have learned something about the realized distribution of gains
from the agreement in the interim. Once the parties choose an indefiniteduration agreement, no further renegotiation takes place.
I assume that if and when the parties renegotiate the agreement, they
incorporate an adjustment factor that makes the expected gain to each of
the parties the same as it was in the original agreement. This adjustment
factor takes account of the information gained about the realized value of

Loosening the Ties that Bind

381

the distribution of gains during the periods since the original agreement
was concluded.
For example, suppose that, after a number of years, states 1 and 2 learn
that state 1’s industry is actually reaping significantly more benefits from
the research venture than state 2’s industry. If the parties originally agreed
to a finite-duration agreement followed by renegotiation, then when they
renegotiate at the end of the initial agreement, they will adjust the investment schedule so that state 1 invests more and state 2 invests less. This
change will roughly bring the actual distribution of gains in line with what
was expected when the agreement was first concluded. Assuming that the
same expected division of gains is the result of every renegotiation is
another way of saying that the relative bargaining power of the two parties
is assumed to be constant over time.
In general, we would expect the bargaining power of the two states to
change over time as their economic fortunes change. In particular, we
might expect the realized division of gains under the agreement to affect
the bargaining power of the two states if and when an agreement is
renegotiated. Thus rather than returning to the initial expected division of
gains in the renegotiated agreement, the states would agree to a new
expected division of gains that would be more favorable to the party
whose realized gain exceeded its original expected gain. Adding changes
in bargaining power to the model in this form increases the variance of
the outcomes conditional on renegotiation because the renegotiation no
longer tries to undo completely the difference between the expected and
realized gain. This, in turn, enlarges the set of cases in which no renegotiation would be chosen by risk-averse states.
I do not incorporate the effects of changes in bargaining power into
the model for four reasons. First, and most important, given that the
duration problem has been wholly neglected in the literature thus far,
I choose to focus exclusively on it and keep other elements of the context
(including the bargaining component) as simple as possible.10 Second,
allowing changes in bargaining power does not affect the comparative
statics presented later. It changes the location of the cutpoint at which
parties switch from one form of agreement to another, but the general

10

This is especially important given that bargaining theory has not yet produced results that
are robust. For example, results reported by Fearon disappear as soon as the war of attrition model is replaced with a Rubinstein alternating-offers model. Fearon 1998. Moreover, even within particular models, results depend greatly on very specific assumptions,
such as the time between offers.

382

International Law and International Relations

comparative static results remain.11 Third, in some cases the resources
affected by the agreement in question are small relative to GNP so that
the actual effect of the realized division of gains under the agreement on
the parties’ bargaining power would be small. Fourth, for pairs of
states involved in multiple agreements, the agreement shocks will tend
to average out, so that the states’ relative bargaining power remains
roughly the same.
In the context of international relations, there is no external authority
available to enforce agreements. In other words, states can renege. In this
model, reneging is equivalent to abandoning the agreement. I assume that
parties that renege suffer a cost. I also assume that the parties can negotiate
a new agreement in the period following the abandonment of the old.
Hence the basic intuition of my model is that the parties will integrate
planned renegotiation into international agreements when the value to
them of reducing the ex ante variance of the outcome stemming from
agreement uncertainty is large relative to the cost of renegotiating. This
reduction in ex ante variance is achieved by realigning the division of
gains at the time of the renegotiation to be closer to the original division
by incorporating an adjustment factor into the agreement. Note that the
adjustment factor is chosen by the parties within the model; it is not
a parameter of the model for which comparative static results can be
obtained. Put differently, it is an endogenous and not an exogenous
variable.

Notation
Formally, assume that there are two prospective parties to the agreement, n 5 1, 2. Let their outcomes in each period t in the absence of the
agreement be given by
Y 1; t 5 b1 þ u1; t
Y 2; t 5 b2 þ u2; t ;
where the outcome Yn,t depends on the particular context but could
represent something like GNP, where b1 and b2 are the expected values of
the outcome measure, and where u1,t and u2,t represent variation in the
outcome over time, independent of the agreement – noise. I assume that
11

I elaborate this point later.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

383

u1,t and u2,t have mean zero and are independently and identically
distributed across periods and across parties with probability density
function f(u). Without loss of generality, I normalize b1 and b2 to zero.
With respect to the agreement, let the total gain from the agreement be
a fixed amount g, known to both parties.12 Denote the expected values of
the shares determined in the bargaining process by m for party 1 and by
(g  m) for party 2. I assume that the actual realization (m þ e) is a random
variable with probability density function h(m þ e) where E(m þ e) 5 m.
Thus in the presence of the agreement, the outcomes of the two parties in
period t are given by
Y 1; t 5 m þ e þ u1;t
Y 2; t 5 g 2 ðm þ eÞ þ u2;t ;
with associated expected values
EðY 1;t Þ 5 m
EðY 2;t Þ 5 g 2 m:13
Note that e has no t subscript because it represents the one-time
agreement uncertainty. It is drawn at the time an agreement is concluded
and stays the same after that. In contrast, the u’s, which represent the
outcome shocks or noise, do have t subscripts, as new u’s are drawn for
both parties each period. Thus the u’s embody persistent noise.
Initial negotiation costs are k1. Renegotiation costs are k2. The adjustment factor incorporated into the agreement at the renegotiation stage is
a, and the cost paid by parties that renege is c.
12

13

The simplifying assumption of a fixed, known g can be relaxed without changing any
implications of the model. A more general model would make g random, with the parties then facing the more difficult problem of untangling both the total gain and the
distribution of gains from the normal noise in the outcome. With a random g, agreements
might be concluded in which the expected value of g ex ante was positive but the realized
value was negative. This provides an additional motivation for having a finite-duration
agreement. Instead of renegotiating, the parties will simply not conclude additional
agreements if they learn that g is probably negative. In many agreement contexts, states
clearly care about both the distribution of gains and the total gain. I have chosen to focus
here on the distribution of gains in the interest of parsimony. None of the comparative
statics in my model depend on the assumption of a fixed g, but allowing g to be a random
variable would substantially increase the notational burden and the formal complexity of
the model.
Note that without period-specific shocks, determining the value of e would take only
a single period. With only a single common shock, ut 5 u1,t 5 u2,t, the exact value of e
could be determined in two periods.

384

International Law and International Relations

In sum, states are often unsure about how agreements will work in
practice. The difference between how they expect an agreement to work
and how it actually works is represented by e, the random component of
the distribution of gains from the agreement. The parties know the
distribution from which e is drawn but must learn about the particular
value of e for their agreement. The variance of the distribution from
which e is drawn represents their degree of agreement uncertainty.
In each period, each of the two parties to an agreement receives some
outcome Y. In the absence of an agreement, the outcome consists of
a known base b and a period-specific random component u. Since the
parties know b, in the absence of an agreement they can figure out u.
When there is an agreement, the situation changes. The outcome Y now
consists of three components: b, u, and either (m þ e) or g – (m þ e). The
terms involving e represent the gains from the agreement. Like u, these
terms are random. Unlike u, these terms are fixed; they do not vary from
period to period. The basic problem facing the parties is to sort out the
effects of the agreement, e, from the normal noise in the outcome, u.
Over time, the parties can learn about the value of (m þ e) or (m – e) realized under the agreement. That is, over time they can distinguish the effect
of the agreement on their outcomes from the period-to-period variation
due to u.
Two-Period Game
For simplicity, I assume throughout that the parties have identical utility
functions and bargaining power and that the agreement yields a positive
gain. The bargaining outcome in both periods is exogenous and satisfies
the Nash bargaining solution.14
Timeline
At the beginning of period 1, the two parties, n 5 1, 2, play a Nash demand
game in which they choose the expected division of gains. The parties’
Nash demand game strategies consist of fmn:mn 2 [0, g]g. If m1 5 m2 and
mn 2 [0, g], the parties continue the negotiations. In all other cases, the
parties conclude no agreement.
If the parties continue the negotiations, they then enter the agreementtype choice stage wherein each party must choose among the following: no
14

This cooperative solution corresponds to the Rubinstein alternating-offers noncooperative solution when d is close to 1. See Osborne and Rubinstein 1990.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

385

agreement (NA); one two-period agreement, which is the analog of
a nonrenegotiated agreement (NR); and two one-period agreements, the
analog of a renegotiated agreement (R). If both parties choose NR, the
parties enter into a nonrenegotiated agreement. If both parties choose R,
the parties enter into a renegotiated agreement. Otherwise, the parties
conclude no agreement (NA). Note that nine possible strategy profiles can
result at this stage, fNA, NR, R) 3 fNA, NR, R), and only two, (NR,
NR) and (R, R), result in an agreement.
Next, nature draws u1,1 and U2,1 and if there is some form of
agreement, e. The outcomes for period 1, Y1,1 and Y2,1, are observed by
both players.
If the parties concluded a two-period agreement in the first period, then
at the beginning of period 2 they choose whether to abide by the duration
provision stipulated in the agreement. Similarly, if the parties agreed to two
one-period agreements with renegotiation in between, they must decide
whether to proceed with the renegotiation.
If the parties negotiated a one-period agreement in the initial period and
elect to proceed with renegotiation, or if one party reneges on a two-period
agreement, the parties negotiate a new agreement. They play a Nash
demand game in which they choose the expected division of gains,
where their action set again consists of fmn*:mn* 2 [0, g]g. If m1* 5
m2* and mn* 2 [0, g], the parties conclude a one-period agreement. Otherwise, the parties conclude no agreement.
Next, nature draws u1,2 and u2,2. At this point the parties receive their
payoffs, and the game ends.

Equilibrium
The equilibrium concept employed is perfect Bayesian equilibrium. I
employ an incomplete-information solution concept because, even though
the preferences of both parties are common knowledge, there is uncertainty about the physical consequences of any concluded agreement.
This gets translated as uncertainty regarding preferences over possible
agreements. In this particular setup, each party is the ‘‘opposite type’’ from
the other; as each party learns about its own type, it also learns about the
other’s type. We can think of party 1 as type þ e and party 2 as type –e.
Additionally, I impose the following restriction: The set of punishment
used by the parties (that is, the costs a party pays after reneging) must be
renegotiation-proof. Appendix A provides a characterization of an
equilibrium of the game.

386

International Law and International Relations
Comparative Statics

I focus here on the two most important implications of my model. Both
have to do with the effects of changing the amount and type of uncertainty
faced by the parties to an agreement. First, consider the effects of changes
in the degree of agreement uncertainty, represented by the variance of e (the
shock to the distribution of gains under the agreement):
Hypothesis 1: All else equal, for risk-averse parties an increase in agreement uncertainty (the variance of e) increases the value of renegotiation and therefore
makes the parties more likely to choose a renegotiated agreement (two one-period
agreements) than a nonrenegotiated agreement (one two-period agreement).15

To see the intuition here, it helps to think of the effect of an increase in
the variance of the agreement shock e in two ways: absolutely and relative
to the variance of the noise, u. To see the absolute effect, consider the
special case where the variance of the noise, u, is zero. In this special case,
an increase in the degree of agreement uncertainty would still increase the
value of renegotiation. The more variable the agreement shocks, the more
that risk-averse states gain in expected utility from being able to undo
them through renegotiation.
To see the relative effect, return to the general case where the variance of
u is not zero. In the general case, states can learn more about the realized
value of e when it is more easily distinguished from u. Increasing the
variance of e while holding the variance of u constant does just that – it
makes it easier to distinguish the agreement shock from the noise. Put
somewhat differently, increasing the variance of e relative to that of u
makes the first-period outcomes more informative about e. Because
renegotiation is more valuable when states have better information about
the realized value of e at the time they renegotiate, an increase in the
variance of e again increases the value of renegotiation.
Now consider the effect of an increase in the degree of agreement
uncertainty on whether states choose to conclude any agreement. For riskaverse parties, any increase in the variance of the outcomes under the
agreement reduces the expected utility (at the time of the decision whether
to conclude an agreement) under either type of agreement relative to no
agreement. This is obvious in the case of a nonrenegotiated agreement, but
it is also the case for a renegotiated agreement, since the adjustment
mechanism does not undo the effects of the agreement shocks in every state
of the world. Note, however, that as long as the distribution of the
15

It also makes it more likely that the parties will choose no agreement at all.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

387

agreement shock is such that the probability that a state actually loses from
an agreement is zero, the parties will always choose some form of
agreement as long as the negotiation costs are not too large.
The second important implication of my model concerns the effects of
changes in the variance of u, the factors outside the agreement (‘‘noise’’ in
this context) that affect the outcome of interest:
Hypothesis 2: All else equal, for risk-averse parties an increase in noise (the
variance of u) decreases the value of renegotiation and therefore makes the parties more likely to choose a nonrenegotiated agreement (a two-period agreement)
than a renegotiated agreement (two one-period agreements).

The intuition here concerns the value of renegotiating at the end of
the first period. As the noise increases, the amount of information the
first-period outcomes provide about the value of e decreases. The less
information the parties have about e, the less value they place on being
able to reset the division of gains under the agreement, and therefore
the less value they place on renegotiating. In other words, an increase in
the noise decreases the information content of the first-period realizations, with the result that the parties learn less about the true value of the
agreement shock. This, in turn, means that the parties cannot do as good
a job of realigning the distribution of gains, which decreases the (ex ante)
value of renegotiation.16 Note that this is precisely the reverse of what
happens under hypothesis 1 when the relative variance of e increases.
Figures 15.1 and 15.2 illustrate the two comparative static hypotheses
using simulated choices from a discretized version of the two-period model.
In the simulations, the base outcome, b, is set to 20.17 The gain from the
agreement, g, is set equal to 8 and is assumed to be divided equally in
expectation between the two parties so that m 5 4. I fix the values of the
discount factor d at 0.9; and the costs of negotiation, renegotiation, and
reneging, k1, k2 and c, at 1.0, 0.5, and 1.0, respectively. I use a cube root
utility function (that is, the utility from a given outcome is its cube root),
which implicitly sets the level of risk aversion for the parties. ***
16

17

Note that in addition to its effect on the relative attractiveness of a renegotiated agreement, an increase in the variance of u tends to decrease the expected utility associated
with every agreement-type choice (including no agreement) for risk-averse parties by
increasing the variance of the realized outcomes.
I use a positive base value to ensure that the utility associated with each possible
realization is always positive. This ensures that I can calculate utility values even with
utility functions such as the cube root. I could change the base value to some larger
number, such as 100 or 1,000, without changing any of the substantive results. Recall
that in the model the base is normalized to zero.

International Law and International Relations

388

Nonrenegotiated agreement
Renegotiated agreement

Expected utility

5.44

5.43

5.42

5.41

5.40

0.3

0.35

0.40

0.45

0.50

Probability of nonzero agreement shock
figure 15.1. Increasing the variance of the agreement shock.

Nonrenegotiated agreement
Renegotiated agreement

Expected utility

5.430

5.425

5.420

5.415

5.410
0.0

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Probability of nonzero outcome shock
figure 15.2. Increasing the variance of the noise.

Conditional on these values for the utility function and the model
parameters, I calculate the utility of each state for a large number of values
for the variances of the noise in the base outcome, u, and the one-time
agreement shock, e. In each case, I assume that u1, u2, and e take on the
values of 2, 0, or 2.
In Figure 15.1, I illustrate the effects of increasing the variance of the
agreement shock, e. I start with probabilities of (0.3,0.4,0.3) for the three
values of e and then symmetrically increase the probabilities of the two
nonzero values until I end up with probabilities of (0.5,0.0,0.5). In other
words, I increase the likelihood that the parties will receive a nonzero
agreement shock. The probability of each nonzero value is shown on the

Loosening the Ties that Bind

389

horizontal axis of the figure. The probabilities for u remain constant at
(0.3,0.4,0.3) for all of the cases in Figure 15.1. The two lines in Figure 15.1
trace out the expected utility for both parties (they are identical) associated
with a nonrenegotiated agreement (the line with the circles), and a renegotiated agreement (the line with the triangles) ***.18 Thus moving from left
to right in the figure shows the effects on the expected utilities of the
different agreement types of an increase in the degree of agreement
uncertainty, holding the noise constant. It can be seen that initially the
states receive a higher expected utility from a nonrenegotiated agreement
(one two-period agreement) but that as the variance of e increases, the
expected utility of a renegotiated agreement (two one-period agreements)
eventually comes to dominate.19 As a result, the states in my model change
their agreement-type choice when the degree of agreement uncertainty
exceeds a certain level.20
Figure 15.2 does the same thing, but this time allowing the probabilities
of the values of u to vary from (0.0,1.0,0.0) to (0.2,0.6,0.2) while holding
the probabilities of the values of e constant at (0.3,0.4,0.3). As you move
to the right, which represents an increase in the degree of noise because
the probabilities of the nonzero values are increasing, the states’
preferences change from wanting to have a renegotiated agreement
(two one-period agreements) to wanting to have a nonrenegotiated
agreement (one two-period agreement).21 This reflects the decreasing
value of renegotiation as the variance of u increases, which causes u to
18

19

20

21

Figures 15.1 and 15.2 both omit the value of no agreement. In each case it always lies
between 5.1 and 5.2. In Figure 15.1 it is flat since it is unaffected by the variance of e. In
Figure 15.2 it declines with the variance of u.
The sudden drops in the expected utility of the nonrenegotiated agreement in Figure 15.1
result from states deciding to renege in particular states of the world when the variance of
the agreement shock reaches a certain level.
If the bargaining power of the parties were affected by the realized distribution of gains as
discussed earlier, this would reduce the expected utility of a renegotiated agreement for
all values of the variance of the agreement shock. This, in turn, would lead the two lines
in Figure 15.1 to cross to the right of where they do now, implying that the states would
choose not to renegotiate in some cases where they otherwise would have.
The fact that the expected utility associated with a nonrenegotiated agreement is
increasing in the variance of the outcome shock (the noise) over most of the range
shown in Figure 15.2 may seem puzzling given that the states are risk-averse. This pattern
results from the effect of the variance of the noise on the probability of states of the world
in which one state reneges and imposes on the other state a cost larger than the benefit it
gets from doing so. As the variance of the noise increases, these states of the world
become less likely. Over this range, the positive effect of reducing the probabilities of
these states of the world on the overall expected value outweighs the negative effect of the
increasing variance in outcomes.

390

International Law and International Relations

‘‘drown out’’ the information about e implicit in the parties’ first-period
outcomes. In other words, as the environment becomes noisier, it is
harder for states to learn.22
Up to this point, I have considered a two-period version of my model
solely for simplicity in exposition and analysis. The real world, of course,
has more than two periods. A more general version of my model lengthens
the time horizon to infinity. The basics of the analysis stay the same, but
states now may face two choices. The first is an agreement-type choice
between no agreement, one infinite-duration agreement, and one finite
agreement followed by an infinite-duration agreement. If states choose to
renegotiate the agreement, they must then make a second choice regarding
the timing of the renegotiation. The degree of noise in the environment will
determine the optimal timing, with more noise leading to a longer period
before renegotiation so that the parties have more time to learn about the
true distribution of gains. This case of a finite-duration agreement followed
by renegotiation and an indefinite-duration agreement is of particular
interest because the NPT adopts this form.

nuclear non-proliferation treaty
* * *
This case study makes the following points. First, it reveals the empirical
importance of this structure of duration and renegotiation provisions. The
NPT is arguably one of the more important international agreements of
this century. An understanding of its provisions necessarily informs any
22

It is important to note that the implications of my model are consistent with certain
neorealist views of international cooperation. While my model incorporates neoliberal assumptions (that is, states care about absolute gains), incorporating the neorealist
assumption that states care about relative gains would actually enlarge the set of cases
for which states would choose to incorporate renegotiation provisions into their
international agreements. In fact, Grieco states that ‘‘If two states are worried or
uncertain about relative achievement of gains, each will prefer a less durable cooperative
arrangement, for each will want to more readily be able to exit from the arrangement in
the event that gaps in gains favor the other.’’ Grieco 1990, 228. (I thank an anonymous
referee for pointing me to this passage in Grieco’s work.) In terms of Figure 15.1, adding
in concerns about relative gains would lower the expected value of a nonrenegotiated
agreement and raise the value of a renegotiated agreement. These movements result from
the fact that concerns about relative gains magnify the utility gains and losses associated
with any given departure from the agreed-upon division of gains. The net result is that the
lines in Figure 15.1 would then cross to the left of where they do in a world where states
care only about absolute gains, which means that adding in concerns about relative gains
increases the set of cases in which the states choose to renegotiate.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

391

analysis of its successes and failures and also contributes to the effective
design of future agreements.
Second, at an even more basic level, the case demonstrates the
importance that the parties to major international agreements assign to
duration and renegotiation provisions. They spend time debating them
during the negotiation process, they implicitly (and sometimes explicitly)
recognize the trade-off captured by my model, and they choose these
provisions in a way that my model shows to make sense.
Third, the case study provides an example of how to operationalize
the key variables in the model. The variables in the model, like many
variables considered by political scientists more generally, are more difficult to operationalize than, for example, earnings are for an economist.
The case pays particular attention to operationalizing the distribution of
gains from the agreement and the uncertainty that initially surrounded
this distribution.
Fourth, the case study demonstrates that my model provides a powerful
framework for organizing and systematizing discussions of the duration
and renegotiation provisions of international agreements. By identifying
the key variables that determine these provisions, it guides the investigator
in sifting through what is, in the case of the NPT, a very large volume of
information. It also highlights key areas on which the parties disagreed
and shows how the solutions they chose solved the problems they faced.
Background and Substance of the Agreement
The NPT was signed in 1968 and entered into force in 1970 for a period
of twenty-five years. In 1995 the parties to the treaty reconvened and
decided to extend the treaty indefinitely. The NPT arose out of fears on
the part of the existing nuclear-weapon states (NWS) during the early
Cold War era that the spread of nuclear weapons to a substantial number of additional countries would be both dangerous and destabilizing.
As Thomas Graham recounts, ‘‘In 1968, the United States Atomic Energy
Commission foresaw a world that might have as many as twenty-eight
nuclear powers. The danger that such a world would pose cannot be
overstated.’’ Quoting a Swiss official, he continues, ‘‘Between two nuclear
powers it’s a game of chess, among four, it’s bridge, among a dozen, it
would be poker, roulette, or any of those games controlled by chance.’’23
In response to this concern, the United States and the Soviet Union,
23

Graham 1989, 662.

392

International Law and International Relations

along with a number of other countries, undertook to establish a treaty
prohibiting the further proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The treaty has the following main provisions: Article 1 prohibits
NWS from transferring nuclear explosives to any recipient regardless of
whether that recipient is a party to the NPT and from otherwise assisting
a nonnuclear-weapon state (NNWS) in developing such weapons. Article 2 places obligations on the NNWS not to receive or manufacture
nuclear explosive devices. Article 3 requires that the signatories negotiate either individually or collectively full-scope safeguards agreements
with the International Atomic Energy Association (IAEA). Articles 4 and
5 provide reassurance to the NNWS that they will be able to enjoy the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear explosions without discrimination, that is, the NWS are obliged to provide both technological and
material assistance to the NNWS. Article 6 demands progress by the
existing nuclear powers on controlling the arms race.24

Duration and Renegotiation: The Role of Uncertainty
Choosing the duration and renegotiation provisions of the NPT provoked an intense debate. The treaty negotiations lasted from 1962 to
1968. As late as 1967, the United States and the Soviet Union (the original drafters of the treaty) were pressing for a treaty with an unlimited
duration, whereas the Germans and the Italians were emphasizing the
impossibility of accepting such a duration. Because of their uncertainty
about the distribution of gains that would result from the NPT, many
NNWS mirrored Germany and Italy in being wary about tying their
hands for an unlimited period in an uncertain world.
First, uncertainties surrounded the security consequences of the
treaty. The NNWS felt great uncertainty about the effort that the
NWS would put into nuclear disarmament.25 Closely related to this is
a paradox inherent in the text of the NPT. If the NWS really did reduce
their nuclear stockpiles as Article 6 commits them to do, the extended
deterrence they provide to their NNWS allies would become less credible,

24
25

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 1968.
A broader formal model of duration and renegotiation choice in the NPT could include
NWS effort as an unobserved variable and actual arms reductions as an observed variable increasing in effort but not completely determined by it. The NNWS, which might
condition their willingness to extend the treaty on observed disarmament, would then
essentially be in a principal-agent relationship with the NWS.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

393

and these states would have a stronger incentive to join the nuclear
club.26 In regard to the nonnuclear NATO countries, George Bunn and
Charles N. Van Doren note that the ‘‘countries that were most advanced
in civilian nuclear technology and that relied on an alliance with the
United States to deter possible attack by the Soviet Union spoke out . . .
against an NPT of longer duration than their alliances might turn out to
be.’’27 Jenson content-analyzed speeches made during a 1968 UN General
Assembly debate on the proposed treaty in an effort to ascertain and
categorize reservations. He reports that 62 percent of the speakers expressed concern regarding security guarantees, wondering how NNWS
would be protected under the NPT.28
Another source of uncertainty about the distribution (and level) of
security benefits under the NPT centered on which countries would end
up participating in the regime. The overall level of gains increases with
the number of countries that join, and the distribution of gains depends
heavily on the geographic distribution of signators.
Second, the NNWS were concerned about the effect of the NPT on
their economic prosperity and on their technological development. They
were apprehensive that the treaty might restrict their ability to make
peaceful use of nuclear energy. The treaty would have to draw a line
between the use of nuclear energy for peaceful, civilian purposes and the
use of nuclear energy for military purposes. Much uncertainty existed
among the NNWS about whether this line could be effectively drawn
and what the distributional effects would be of drawing it. Speaking
before the Bundestag in 1967, Foreign Minister Brandt declared that his
‘‘government and others are also seeking to insure that the nonproliferation treaty does not further widen the already existing technological
gap between the nuclear powers and the non-nuclear countries.’’29
Many potential NPT members also worried about how economically
costly the IAEA monitoring would turn out to be. George Quester details
concerns raised by the Japanese nuclear power industry about the potential costs associated with the extensive on-site monitoring required by
the NPT, including the possibility of shutting down plants in order to
26
27

28
29

See, for example, the discussion in Smith 1987.
Bunn and Van Doren 1992, 5. These NNWS did not propose making the NPT duration
contingent on the continued membership of the United States in NATO. This suggests
that the barriers to contingency in agreements that are often invoked in theory are also
present in fact.
Jenson 1974, 2.
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 1967, 49.

394

International Law and International Relations

allow verification of nuclear fuel information. Quester also notes that
many states (including Japan) worried that ‘‘the IAEA inspectorate may
become imperiously bureaucratic, demanding greater access even where
no increase whatsoever is thereby achieved in safeguards reliability . . .
due to personal vanity, institutional imperialism, or excessive legalism.’’30
These concerns affect both the distribution and level of gains given
concerns that the IAEA would be dominated by those NWS whose experts
performed the inspections; those states could vary the inspection costs to
suit their political and economic agenda.
Another area of uncertainty about the distribution of economic gains
concerned the NPT’s failure to fully address the relationship between
parties to the NPT who supply nuclear technology and NNWS not party
to the treaty who purchase it. The NNWS that joined the treaty worried
that NNWS not party to the treaty would be able to obtain nuclear
technology with fewer restrictions than signatory NNWS.
The potential decline of the U.S. commercial nuclear industry added
still another source of uncertainty. As Roger K. Smith notes, this decline
was expected, but it would have been difficult to know in advance when
other suppliers would emerge and who they would be.31 These changes
would affect states on both sides of the market for peaceful nuclear
technology.
Third, uncertainties surrounded the political benefits and costs that
would result from such an agreement. Because the NPT would make the
NNWS importers of peaceful nuclear technology, they were uncertain
about whether this situation would give the NWS political leverage they
could exploit. A similar concern was expressed about fuel supplies. Moreover, the effect of treaty adherence on the political power and prestige of
the NNWS was uncertain. Prestige might follow from the acquisition of
nuclear weapons or it might follow instead from a state’s willingness to
accede to the treaty. As Lloyd Jensen states: ‘‘If there is general acceptance
of the NPT, the few states refusing to join are likely to be just that much
more criticized.’’ Only time would tell how universal the treaty (and the
norm embodied in it) would become.32
Other political concerns revolved around specific regional issues. According to Quester, Italy worried that European unification would ‘‘be
impossible once the NPT has endorsed France and Britain as nuclear states
30
31
32

Quester 1973,105, 212.
Smith 1987.
Jensen 1974, 38.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

395

and relegated Germany and Italy permanently to the position of nonweapons status.’’33 That is, Italy worried that the distribution of gains
from the NPT would skew the distribution of power in Europe in ways
that would make European integration difficult if not impossible. On the
other side of the globe, Japan had concerns over how the NPT would
affect its ability to react to a broader U.S. withdrawal from Southeast
Asia in the wake of the Vietnam War.
In sum, the parties to the NPT faced substantial uncertainty at the
time of its inception about its effects on their security and on their
economic and political well being. Some of this uncertainty, such as that
surrounding how many countries would eventually join the regime,
concerned the overall level of gains from the agreement. However, much
of the political and security uncertainty, and all of the economic uncertainty, concerned the distribution of gains (and possibly losses) from
the NPT. For example, conditional on any given number of countries
joining the regime, which specific countries joined had large effects on
the distribution of security gains from the agreement. In the economic
realm, concerns about how well peaceful uses of nuclear power could
be separated from military ones, competition in the market for peaceful nuclear power technology, and IAEA inspection costs are all
distribution.
This kind of uncertainty is the cornerstone of hypothesis 1. In this case,
the agreement shock, e, can be broken down into three components:
security, economic, and political. All three are characterized by high
variance.34
Additionally, it is important to note that many aspects of the uncertainty
about the distribution of gains from the NPT were of the one-time
character that underlies my model. For example, to the extent that the
advent of the NPT set in motion a transition to a stable equilibrium in terms
of membership in the regime, all that states have to do is to wait and find
out what that equilibrium will be to determine the realized distribution of
gains. Similarly, once a stable set of institutions arises to govern the transfer
of peaceful nuclear technology by members to nonmember NNWS, the
33
34

Quester 1973, 7.
Hypothesis 1 is essentially a comparative static result, which cannot be tested with this
case study. The case study does, however, show the plausibility of the model. Later, I
briefly compare the NPT to the Outer Space Treaty for which the variance of the
agreement shock was arguably low. Additionally, hypothesis 1 is put forth as a conjecture
in the Rational Designs project (Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal [2001]) and is the most
strongly supported conjecture among the eight case studies.

396

International Law and International Relations

member NNWS can determine the effect of this aspect of the NPT on their
economic well being.
Duration and Renegotiation: The Compromise
The Italian representative to the negotiating committee, Roberto
Caracciolo, proposed a ‘‘certain flexibility in the provisions of the treaty
relating to duration, amendments, and the right of withdrawal’’;
reacting to Article 7 of the draft treaty, which called for a treaty of
unlimited duration, he stated that, ‘‘it is not the lot of man, to pledge
eternity. Moreover, if we look back across our thousands of years of
history, we see very few noninstitutional treaties that have simply
survived the vicissitudes of one generation, let alone achieved immortality. Therefore we fear that to affirm a principle so remote from reality
may introduce into the treaty an element of weakness rather than of
strength.’’35 Reacting to this same article, a Swiss aide-memoire stated
that ‘‘to subscribe to such a commitment seems hardly conceivable in
a field where development is as rapid and unpredictable as that of nuclear
science and its technical, economic, political, and military implications.’’
Consequently, it would be preferable that the treaty should be concluded
for a definite period, at the end of which a review conference would
decide about its renewal.36
The states that favored an unlimited duration argued that if the parties
knew for certain that the treaty would end on a specified date in the future,
they would feel pressure to obtain nuclear weapons by that date, thereby
undermining the treaty. Furthermore, they argued that it was important
that the treaty be guaranteed a life-span of sufficient length to enable it to
serve as a foundation upon which other nuclear disarmament measures
could be built.
The parties began the path toward compromise when Caracciolo
submitted the following to replace the ‘‘unlimited duration’’ paragraph
in the draft treaty: ‘‘This treaty shall have a duration of X years and shall
be renewed automatically for any party which shall not have given, six
months before the date of expiry of the treaty, notice of its intention to
cease to be party to the treaty.’’ He stated that ‘‘the proposed amendment
could be regarded as an acceptable compromise between the idea of
unlimited duration and that of a fixed term. It provides that the treaty
35
36

U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 1967, 527–29.
Ibid., 573.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

397

shall always remain in force for those who do not denounce it, and at
the same time allows those who are not satisfied with its operation to
withdraw after a certain number of years.’’37 A month later the Italian
amendment was revised: ‘‘The present treaty shall have a duration of X
years. It shall be automatically extended for terms equal to its initial
duration for those governments which, subject to six months notice,
shall not have made known their intention to withdraw.’’38
The final resolution of the duration and renegotiation issues was a
compromise between the Soviet and U.S. desires for an indefiniteduration agreement and the preferences of the NNWS for a finite learning period during which they could determine whether the agreement
as it worked in practice was in their interest. As Bunn and Van Doren
explain, ‘‘The Italian proposal for a specific period, plus successive
automatic renewals, was the most detailed and the most important
before the American and Soviet co-chairmen when they drafted the present language of Article 10.2.’’ They continue: ‘‘What the Co-Chairmen
drafted – the present Article 10.2 – called for an extension conference
after 25 years to decide whether to extend the Treaty ‘indefinitely . . .
or for an additional fixed period or periods.’ It thus accepted the basic
Italian idea of a first period of years at the end of which there would
be an opportunity for renewal. To the Italian option for an indefinite
number of consecutive renewal periods, the drafters added other options,
including indefinite renewal and one fixed period.’’39
The drafters also altered the renewal mechanism proposed by the
Italians. Instead of individual notices of intentions to withdraw (and
therefore automatic subsequent withdrawal), the duration issue would be
decided at a multilateral extension conference after twenty-five years.
Why did the NWS and NNWS have different preferences over duration?
This can easily be explained within the context of my model. It is
reasonable to assume that the distribution of possible values of the
agreement shock e was skewed. Specifically, there was virtually no chance
that the NWS could ‘‘lose big’’ from the NPT. The worst that could
happen for them would be to find out that nuclear weapons had no use
and hence were a complete waste of resources. In contrast there was
a chance that the NNWS could ‘‘lose big’’ from adhering to an agreement
that demanded they forsake nuclear weapons in a world in which other
37
38
39

Ibid., 529.
Bunn and Van Doren 1991, 7.
Ibid., 7–8.

398

International Law and International Relations

states – both members and nonmembers of the NPT – possessed them.
Such a skewed distribution would imply different preferences over
duration even if the expected gains of the NWS and NNWS were
equal.40
Resolving the Uncertainty Through Learning
The sources of economic, political, and security outcomes are ambiguous.
For example, if a state experiences a low growth rate in a given year,
the role played by its decision not to develop its own nuclear industry
may not be immediately apparent. The costs and benefits of nuclear
energy as a source of power were quite uncertain in the late 1960s and
early 1970s. Hence it would take time for states to sort out the effects of
the NPT on their well being from those of other factors. Put another way,
the level of noise (the cornerstone of hypothesis 2) is high.
If my model is relevant to this case, we should see evidence that the
states involved did indeed initiate learning processes to help them
distinguish the value of the agreement shock from the noise in the
environment. Again, the real world is seldom two periods, and the NPT
context is no exception. The multiperiod variant of hypothesis 2
addresses both the incidence and the timing of renegotiation.41
The parties to the NPT planned review conferences every five years
at which they could cooperatively take stock of how the treaty was
working in practice. This interval was chosen in part because it would
take approximately that long to produce arms control agreements. Referring to the Third Review Conference, Hon. Lewis A. Dunn, of the
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, stated:
The main task at the Review Conference will be an article-by-article review of the
operation of the Treaty. Woven throughout that review and ensuing debate there
will be five major questions. First, has the Treaty strengthened the security of the
parties by helping prevent the further spread of nuclear explosives? Second, how
well has the Treaty facilitated cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy?
Third, what has been done to bring the nuclear arms race to an end? Fourth,
what can realistically be done to strengthen the NPT? And most important of all,
weighing each of these considerations, has the NPT been a success?42

40

41
42

For simplicity, the formal model and the simulations presented in the second section
assume the agreement shock, e, has a symmetric distribution. Importantly, there is nothing in the model that precludes the agreement shock from having a skewed distribution.
Koremenos 1999.
U.S. House of Representatives 1985, 65.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

399

The evidence indicates that the uncertainty about many aspects of the
true distribution of gains persisted years after the NPT was signed. At the
1980 Review Conference, the debate centered on Article 4 (which focuses
on technological exchange) and Article 6 (which focuses on arms control).
Disagreements between the NWS and the NNWS regarding how these
Articles were working in practice prevented the conference participants
from agreeing on and hence issuing a final document. In other words,
given the level of noise, the parties had not yet been able to determine
the true distributional effects of the NPT. By 1985, much more of the
uncertainty surrounding Article 4 had been resolved, as the following
statement by Dunn illustrates:
Since the 1980 Review Conference:
all new or amended agreements for cooperation with non-nuclear
weapon states entered into by the United States have been with parties
to the NPT or the Treaty of Tlatelolco;43
 virtually all US exports of enriched uranium . . . were to NPT
parties; . . .
 all of US-funded IAEA ‘‘Footnote A’’ (extrabudgetary) technical assistance projects – 111 projects for more than $4.5 million – have been
for developing country Non-Proliferation Treaty parties.44


Essentially, the passage of time resolved much of the uncertainty over
the distribution of economic gains from the NPT. Regarding the issue
that raised so many concerns during the original negotiations, the parties
successfully separated the civilian and military uses of nuclear technology
so that trade in legitimate nuclear materials flourished under the NPT
within a network of IAEA safeguards agreements. In practice, there has
not been discrimination against the NNWS regarding technological
progress in nuclear energy. With respect to Article 5, which addresses the
issue of peaceful nuclear explosions, by the mid-1970s, it was determined
by the NWS that the anticipated benefits from such explosions were not
forthcoming.
Furthermore, over the two-and-a-half decades following the signing
of the NPT, the parties witnessed the development of alternative suppliers of nuclear technology, such as France and Germany. Taken together,
these developments represented the stabilization of the regime regarding
43
44

The Treaty of Tlatelolco establishes Latin America as a nuclear weapons–free zone.
U.S. House of Representatives 1985, 69–70.

400

International Law and International Relations

the distribution of peaceful nuclear technology to NNWS. Under the
regime that eventually emerged, it was clear that the NNWS that joined
the NPT would not suffer economic harm along this dimension.45
In addition to the concerns that played a major role at the review
conferences, many other aspects of the uncertainty surrounding the
distribution of gains from the NPT were largely or completely resolved
during the initial trial period: In terms of security, the NPT greatly reduced
the spread of nuclear weapons compared with what would likely have
occurred without it. During the trial period, membership in the NPT
increased to the point of being almost global.
In terms of the distribution of political gains (and losses), it became
clear that concerns that the NPT would prevent European integration
were groundless. What turned out to matter for European integration
was not Britain’s bombs but Germany’s GNP. Time also rendered moot
Japan’s worries about its ability to react to a broad U.S. pullout from
Asia.
In 1995 after four review conferences, the 163 parties to the treaty
gathered in New York to decide whether the NPT would continue in
force indefinitely or be extended for an additional fixed period or
periods. Interviews with conference participants suggest that essentially all of the parties came to the conference favoring extension, a fact
that itself provides powerful evidence of learning. Debate centered on
whether extension would be indefinite or for a series of twenty-fiveyear periods.46 In the end, a consensus resolution extended the NPT
indefinitely. The NWS had gained what they expected to in terms of
maintaining their power and influence (as Panofsky and Bunn note,
‘‘possession of nuclear weapons and permanent membership in the
UN Security council remain identical’’),47 and the NNWS had learned
how the NPT worked for them in practice.
* * *

45

46

47

Nye presents additional examples of learning and uncertainty resolution in his discussion
of policies relating to the nuclear fuel cycle and attempts to control aspects of the cycle
related to nuclear weapons development. Nye 1981.
The interviews appear in Welsh 1995. The debate regarding the extension provision was
largely among the NNWS, since the NWS all favored indefinite extension. Ultimately, the
Canadian argument that indefinite duration would cause the NWS ‘‘to be permanently
held accountable to Article VI on disarmament’’ carried the day.
Panofsky and Bunn 1994, 9.

Loosening the Ties that Bind

401

conclusion
The credibility of commitments in the face of uncertainty requires a tradeoff between flexibility and constraint. I focus on a particular form of
uncertainty – a one-shot uncertainty surrounding the division of gains
from an agreement – and on a particular kind of flexibility – the combination of limited duration followed by a single renegotiation.
Some might argue that we do not observe much reneging on international agreements empirically and draw the implication that pretty much
any duration and renegotiation provisions would do in a given context. In
my model, this is clearly false. I calculate the lost utility from failure to
choose the optimal provisions. In the case of small deviations, the lost
utility takes the form of unrealized potential gains from the agreement. In
the case of large deviations, it takes the form of reneging or failure to
initiate the agreement at all. Empirically, a selection process similar to that
described by George Downs, David Rocke, and Peter N. Barsoom regarding state compliance in international agreements is at work with
respect to duration and renegotiation provisions.48 The reason we do not
observe much reneging in actual agreements is in part because their
duration and renegotiation provisions have been chosen in ways that act
to minimize this costly behavior. For example, the reason we do not
observe agreements failing because of uncontrollable economic circumstances is that agreements in areas subject to such disruptions will tend to
be of short duration – short enough that states experiencing sudden losses
will stay with the agreement until it is renegotiated rather than renege.
My analysis also responds to some recent game-theoretic work in international relations. James D. Fearon points out a weakness in current theories
of international cooperation that focus primarily on the enforcement of
international agreements while ignoring the bargaining that generates the
agreements in the first place. Fearon’s model integrates the bargaining over
the terms of an agreement into the cooperation problem. This formulation
reveals that the same shadow of the future that allows self-enforcing
agreements also makes reaching an agreement more difficult by increasing
the distributional effects of the selection of the initial equilibrium.49

48
49

Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom 1996.
Fearon 1998. Fearon’s work as well as Morrow’s show how distributional differences
can undermine cooperation in significant ways. Morrow 1994. These works are in part
a response to Grieco and Krasner, who have rightly argued that neoliberals tend to
emphasize enforcement issues and ignore distributional issues. See Grieco 1988; and
Krasner 1991.

402

International Law and International Relations

I provide a theoretical justification for the fact that states often integrate planned renegotiation into international agreements. Building in
renegotiation at the start reduces the distributional impacts of the initial
equilibrium selection but does not reduce the shadow of the future that
supports enforcement of the agreement as a whole since violations in the
initial period can still be punished by noncooperation in future periods. Of
course, allowing renegotiation adds the possibility that one party may drop
out at the end of a particular finite-duration contract. Indeed, in the case of
the International Coffee Agreement, the United States did just that.
Nonetheless, if the probability of continuation is sufficiently high, finiteduration contracts linked by renegotiation may represent the real-world
solution to Fearon’s theoretical dilemma.
Finally, my analysis extends the neoliberal international relations literature beyond its current focus on the general issue of how cooperation can
emerge. Both Robert Axelrod and Kenneth Oye suggest devices such
as lengthening the shadow of the future, practicing reciprocity, and
improving recognition capabilities; Stephen D. Krasner looks at the role
of international regimes in promoting and maintaining cooperation; and
Robert O. Keohane argues that regimes reduce the transactions costs associated with international cooperation.50 This literature has opened up
the central questions of international politics. It has done so, however,
only by moving well away from any detailed analysis of specific institutional arrangements or questions of institutional design. In other
words, this literature has failed to investigate the precise mechanisms
through which cooperation can emerge.51 There is no inherent reason,
however, why the broader political issues cannot be considered simultaneously with the specific institutional arrangements designed to address
them in ways that illuminate both the broader relationships and the
institutionalization itself. My goal in investigating duration and renegotiation provisions has been to deepen our understanding of international
cooperation by asking about specifics.
50
51

See Axelrod 1984; Oye 1986; Krasner 1983; and Keohane 1984.
Likewise, the tools of game theory have been directed mainly at abstract questions that
emphasize cooperation rather than institutional design as the dependent variable.

16
Driving with the Rearview Mirror: On the Rational
Science of Institutional Design
Alexander Wendt

How can social scientists best contribute to the design of international
institutions? Presumably our value lies in producing knowledge about
design that those designing institutions need but do not have. But what
kind of knowledge is that? What should a science of institutional design
be ‘‘about?’’
As a discipline international relations (IR) has barely begun to think
about institutional design. Anarchy makes the international system among
the least hospitable of all social systems to institutional solutions to problems, encouraging actors to rely on power and interest instead. *** Skeptics
may be right that all this activity is unimportant but policymakers apparently disagree. And that in turn has left IR with less to say to them than it
might have. By bracketing whether institutions matter and turning to the
problem of institutional design, therefore, this volume takes an important
step toward a more policy-relevant discourse about international politics.
The articles in this volume deserve to be assessed on their own terms,
within the particular rationalist framework laid out in Barbara Koremenos,
Charles Lipson, and Duncan Snidal’s introduction. That framework highlights collective-action problems and incomplete information as impediments to institutional design. *** However, offering an internal critique of
the Rational Design project from any rationalist perspective is not something I am particularly qualified or inclined to do, nor was it the charge
given to me when I was generously invited to contribute. From the start
For their helpful comments on a draft of this article, I am grateful to two anonymous
reviewers, the IO editors, Michael Barnett, Deborah Boucoyannis, Martha Finnemore, Peter
Katzenstein, and especially Jennifer Mitzen.

403

404

International Law and International Relations

the editors deliberately set aside a number of ‘‘nonrationalist’’ arguments
in order to see how far they could push their approach to the problem. The
purpose of soliciting this comment was to get an outside perspective.
Actually, I am not that qualified or inclined to make a fully external
critique either. Although some epistemological issues will come up, I share
the volume’s commitment to social science, and while I doubt that rationalism can tell us everything, I certainly think it can tell us a lot.1 Additional insights about institutional design might emerge by rejecting
social science or rationalism altogether, but I shall not do so here. However, in the space between a purely internal and purely external critique
I hope to raise some fairly fundamental questions about the approach. ***
I shall raise two main concerns, one more external than the other.
The first is the volume’s neglect of alternatives to its explanation of institutional designs. At base, the theory of rational design is that states and
other actors choose international institutions to further their own interests.2 This amounts to a functionalist claim: actors choose institutions
because they expect them to have a positive function.3 Alternatives to this
hypothesis come in at least two forms, both associated with ‘‘sociological’’ or ‘‘constructivist’’ approaches to institutions.4
On the one hand, alternatives could be rival explanations, where the
relationship to the theory of rational design is zero-sum; variance explained by one is variance not explained by the other. At first glance it might
seem hard to identify plausible rivals. One is tempted to say, Of course
actors design institutions to further their interests – what else would they
do? But in fact there are some interesting rivals, both to the proposition
that institutions are rationally chosen and to the proposition that they are
designed. I discuss each in turn and argue that neglect of these alternatives
makes it more difficult to assess the volume’s conclusions. ***
On the other hand, ‘‘alternatives’’ could refer to explanations that do not
contradict rational-design theory but embed it within broader social or
historical contexts that construct its elements (preferences, beliefs, and so
on). Whereas the question with rival explanations is one of variance
explained, the issue here is one of ‘‘causal depth.’’5 Even if states choose
rationally, this may be less interesting than the underlying structures that
1
2
3
4

5

See Wendt 1999; and Fearon and Wendt forthcoming.
Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal [2001], 762.
On functionalism in design theory and its alternatives, see especially Pierson 2000b.
For good introductions to this extensive literature, see Powell and DiMaggio 1991; Hall
and Taylor 1996; and March and Olsen 1998.
Wilson 1994.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

405

make certain choices rational in the first place. It is on such structures
that sociological and constructivist approaches to institutions typically
focus. ***
* * *
Despite its focus on alternative explanations, this first critique remains
internal in the sense that it assumes, with the Rational Design project, that
the question we are trying to answer about institutional design is an explanatory one: Why do institutions have the features they do? However,
part of what makes the problem of institutional design interesting, in my
view, is that it raises further questions which go beyond that explanatory
concern. In particular, the term design readily calls up the policy-relevant
question, What kind of institutions should we design? *** [Given] that
this volume focuses on a theoretic issue with important policy implications, it seems useful in this essay to reflect on how the gap between
positive and normative could be narrowed further.
Bridging this gap depends, I shall argue, on recognizing the epistemological differences between the kinds of knowledge sought in the scientific
and policy domains, which stem from different attitudes toward time.
Positive social scientists are after ‘‘explanatory’’ knowledge, knowledge
about why things happen. This is necessarily backward-looking, since we
can only explain what has already occurred ***. Policymakers, and institutional designers, in contrast, need ‘‘making’’ or ‘‘practical’’ knowledge,
knowledge about what to do. This is necessarily forward-looking, since it is
about how we should act in the future. As Henry Jackman puts it, ‘‘we live
forwards but understand backwards.’’6 The former cannot be reduced to
the latter. Knowing why we acted in the past can teach us valuable lessons,
but unless the social universe is deterministic, the past is only contingently
related to the future. Whether actors preserve an existing institution like
state sovereignty or design a new one like the EU is up to them. ***
Practical knowledge may nevertheless interact in interesting ways
with explanatory knowledge. To show this, in the last third of this article
I briefly discuss two domains of inquiry about institutional design not
addressed in this volume. The first is institutional effectiveness. *** The
second domain is the specifically normative one. What values should we
pursue in institutions? ***
Positive and normative inquiries are, of course, in many ways distinct, but a science of institutional design that deals only with the former
6

Jackman 1999.

406

International Law and International Relations

will be incomplete and useful primarily for ‘‘driving with the rearview
mirror.’’ The larger question I want to raise here, therefore, is an epistemological one – what should count as ‘‘knowledge’’ about institutional
design? In social science we often assume that knowledge is only about
explaining the past. Institutional design is an issue where the nature of the
problem – making things in the future – may require a broader view ***.

alternatives to rational design
Given the question, What explains variation in institutional design? it is
clear that rational-design theory provides some leverage. But how much
leverage? It is difficult to say until we make lateral comparisons to its
rivals and vertical comparisons to deeper explanations. Thus, assuming
that the phrase ‘‘rational design’’ is not redundant, I break the volume’s
hypothesis down into two parts, that institutions are chosen rationally
and that they are designed.
Alternatives to ‘‘Rational’’
*** Rationality can be defined in various ways.7 In rational-choice theory
it refers to instrumental or ‘‘logic of consequences’’ thinking:8 Actors are
rational when they choose strategies that they believe will have the optimal consequences given their interests. *** This is a subjective definition of rationality in that a rational choice is not what will actually
maximize an actor’s pay-offs (we might call this an ‘‘objective’’ view of
rationality), but what the actor thinks will do so. ***
If for a single actor rational action is what subjectively maximizes
its interests, then when there are multiple actors, as in international
politics, a rationally chosen institution will be one that solves their
collective-action problem ***. *** Collective-action problems, in short,
are subjective at the group level, in that they are constituted by a shared
perception of some facts in the world as (1) being a ‘‘problem’’ (versus
not), (2) requiring ‘‘collective action’’ (versus not), and (3) having certain features that constitute what kind of collective-action problem it
is (coordination, cooperation, security, economic, and so on). These
understandings are only partly determined by objective facts in the
world ***. They are also constructed by a communicative process of
7
8

See especially Hargreaves-Heap 1989.
Jackman 1999.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

407

interpreting what that world means and how and why designers should
care about it.9 ***
* * *
What are the alternatives to the hypothesis that states choose subjectively rational institutions? One, of course, is that states knowingly
choose institutions that will defeat their purposes, but that does not seem
very plausible. We have to look elsewhere for interesting alternatives. I
discuss two.
The Logic of Appropriateness
One alternative is that states choose institutional designs according to the
‘‘logic of appropriateness’’:10 Instead of weighing costs and benefits, they
choose on the basis of what is normatively appropriate. *** In international politics there are many examples of decision making on appropriateness grounds. An example I have used before is what stops the United
States from conquering the Bahamas, instrumental factors or a belief that
this would be wrong?11 One can construct an ‘‘as if,’’ cost-benefit story to
explain nonconquest, but I doubt this is the operative mechanism; it is
more likely that U.S. policymakers see this as illegitimate. A more difficult
and thus interesting example is provided by Nina Tannenwald’s study of
the ‘‘nuclear taboo,’’ which suggests that even when instrumental factors
weighed in favor of using nuclear weapons, as in the Vietnam War, U.S.
decision makers refrained on normative grounds.12 The way such a logic
ultimately works is through the internalization of norms. As actors become
socialized to norms, they make them part of their identity, and that identity
in turn creates a collective interest in norms as ends in themselves.13 The
result is internalized self-restraint: actors follow norms not because it is in
their self-interest, but because it is the right thing to do in their society. ***
The Bahamas and nuclear taboo examples highlight the fact that the
logic of appropriateness has usually been used in IR to explain compliance with regimes.14 *** However, design is a different question from
compliance, to which it is less obvious that logics of appropriateness are
directly relevant.
9
10
11
12
13
14

Kratochwil 1989.
March and Olsen 1998.
Wendt 1999, 289–90.
Tannenwald 1999.
Wendt 1999.
The Meyer School being an important exception.

408

International Law and International Relations

Nevertheless, there are at least three ways in which normative logics
might be rivals to rational explanations of institutional design. One is
by supplying desiderata for institutions that make little sense on consequentialist grounds. A norm of universal membership, for example,
operates in many international regimes. Why do landlocked states have
a say in the Law of the Sea, or Luxembourg a vote in the EU? It is not obvious
that the answers lie in the enforcement and distributional considerations
emphasized by the Rational Design framework. Or consider the norm that
Great Powers have special prerogatives. Without reference to this idea, it is
hard to explain the inclusion of Russia in the Group of Eight, or to make
sense of debates about the future of the UN Security Council. The norm that
the control of international institutions should be democratic is also gaining
strength. The Rational Design framework proposes that designs for institutional control reflect degrees of uncertainty and asymmetries of
contribution, yet in debates about how to fix the ‘‘democratic deficit’’ in
the EU and other international organizations such cost-benefit considerations seem less salient than questions of legitimacy and principle.15 ***
And so on. These possibilities do not mean that rational factors are not
also operative in regime design, but they do suggest the story may be more
complicated than a pure consequentialism would allow.
A second, converse, way in which logics of appropriateness may
constitute rival hypotheses is by taking design options that might be
instrumentally attractive off the table as ‘‘normative prohibitions.’’16 ***
[One] might expect a purely rational regime for dealing with ‘‘failed
states’’ to include a trusteeship option, but because of its association with
colonialism, this is unacceptable to the international community. Finally,
norms about what kinds of coercion may be used in different contexts
may also factor into regime design. Military intervention to collect sovereign debts was legitimate in the nineteenth century,17 but it is hard to
imagine this being done today. *** A true test of rational-design theory
would include all instrumentally relevant options, not just those that are
normatively acceptable.
Finally, logics of appropriateness can affect the modalities used to
design institutions, which as a result may be historically specific. ***
In at least three ways, then, logics of appropriateness may help structure international institutions. These possibilities do not mean that
15
16
17

See, for example, Pogge 1997; and Dryzek 1999.
Nadalmann 1990.
Krasner 1999.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

409

consequentialism is wholly absent. But insofar as our objective is to assess
variance explained, the logic of appropriateness suggests that rival factors
may be important as well.
* * *
On Uncertainty
In addition to instrumental thinking, rationality as understood in this
volume relies on a particular, and contested, way of handling uncertainty.
As the editors point out, a focus on uncertainty is one of the Rational
Design project’s significant departures from earlier rationalist (and nonrationalist) scholarship on international institutions.18 Since uncertainty
is intrinsic to social life, and especially to institutional design – which tries
to structure an otherwise open future – addressing it can make IR more
realistic and policy-relevant. However, the Rational Design framework
seems to treat the nature of uncertainty as unproblematic and ends up
with a conceptualization that effectively reduces it to risk. This assertion
may seem wrong, since the editors say they are adopting the ‘‘standard
terminology in using the term uncertainty instead of risk,’’ 19 but the
premise of this terminology is that the two are equivalent. That there is an
important distinction between risk and uncertainty has been known at
least since Frank Knight’s classic 1921 work20 and the distinction is used
in some rationalist scholarship today, even elsewhere by Snidal himself.21
But in most orthodox economics and formal theory the two are conflated,
and it is to this literature that this volume seems most indebted. In contrast, heterodox Austrian and post-Keynesian economists vigorously
uphold Knight’s distinction and indeed base much of their critique of
mainstream economics on its failure to do so.22 ***
‘‘Risk’’ describes a situation in which some parameters of the decision
problem, such as other actors’ preferences or beliefs, are not known for
certain, but – importantly – all the possibilities are known and can be assigned probabilities that add up to 1. The utility of different courses of
action is then weighted by these probabilities, leading to the formalism of
expected-utility theory. A key implication of risk is that even though actors

18
19
20
21
22

Also see Koremenos 2001.
Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal 2001, 779.
Knight 1921.
For example, Abbott and Snidal 2000, 442.
The literature here is extensive. See, for example, Davidson 1991; Vercelli 1995; and
Dequech 1997.

410

International Law and International Relations

cannot be certain about the outcomes of their choices, they can at least see
well-defined (if still probabilistic) relationships between ends and means,
so that they can calculate precisely the chances of achieving their goals
with different strategies.23 Choose A, and there is a given chance that payoff X will occur; choose B, another chance; and so on. This is significant
because it means there is always a clear and principled answer to the
question, What is the rational thing to do?
*** [Uncertainty] exists when an actor does not know all the possibilities in a situation, cannot assign probabilities to them,24 or those
probabilities do not sum to unity. To distinguish it from the standard
view, uncertainty in this heterodox tradition is often qualified with
adjectives like ‘‘strong,’’ ‘‘hard,’’ ‘‘genuine,’’ or ‘‘structural.’’ *** [Where]
there is genuine uncertainty, the clear (if probabilistic) relationship
between ends and means breaks down, so that optimal behavior may
not be distinguishable from sub-optimal. If optimality is no longer
calculable, then what is instrumentally rational is no longer well defined.
This suggests a rival hypothesis about how rational actors should behave. On the orthodox view, actors facing incomplete information should
continually adjust their beliefs and strategies in response to changing
estimates of the situation. The importance of such updating is reflected in
the volume’s conjectures about the effects of uncertainty on rational design, namely that institutions should maximize flexibility and individual
control. In contrast, Ronald Heiner argues on heterodox grounds that
actors facing genuine uncertainty may be better off not trying to optimize,
because they are not competent to grasp the true problem and so are
prone to make mistakes and have regrets.25 On his view, in other words,
in situations of genuine uncertainty expected-utility theory may actually
be a poor guide to ‘‘rational’’ behavior. Instead, actors should do just the
opposite of what that theory recommends: follow simple, rigid rules and
avoid continually updating expected values. Heiner argues further that
most people in the real world understand this, since their behavior is
much more stable than would be expected if they were constantly optimizing. Under conditions of genuine uncertainty, it is our willingness to
depart from the optimizing standard that is the ‘‘origin of predictable
behavior.’’26 In the context of institutional design, therefore, the rational

23
24
25
26

Beckert 1996, 819.
Which may presuppose a nonsubjectivist view of probability.
Heiner 1983.
Ibid.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

411

action may be to minimize flexibility and control rather than to maximize them.
*** [The] inferences drawn in the empirical articles about how ‘‘uncertainty’’ should play out concretely seem generally persuasive, and so it is
not clear that the heterodox view would lead to different conclusions. Yet
some interesting questions remain. In particular, one wonders whether the
apparent empirical strength of the volume’s treatment of uncertainty is
related to the fact that five of its eight articles concern the economic issuearea.27 One might expect this domain to have relatively weak logics of
appropriateness, and so actors will have little incentive to bind themselves
to inflexible rules over which they lack individual control. *** However,
in issue-areas where logics of appropriateness are stronger, like human
rights or perhaps the environment, the heterodox view may be a better
guide to ‘‘rational’’ design. In the face of (genuine) uncertainty in these
domains states may prefer to define rigid criteria of acceptable behavior
rather than maintain the conditions for optimizing their individual
interests. On this continuum the security issue-area may occupy an
interesting middle ground: in some respects a domain of pure rational
self-interest where the volume’s conjectures should apply, in others one
of deep if limited norms, like those embodied in Just War theory and
prohibitions on the use of chemical and biological weapons, which
seem harder to square with a desire to maintain flexibility and control.28
In short, the possibility that the meaning of rational behavior under
(genuine) uncertainty varies by issue-area seems worth pursuing. ***
* * *
Alternatives to ‘‘Design’’
In the preceding section I mapped some of the contrast space implied by
‘‘rationality’’ as a determinant of institutional variation. Although there
will be some overlap, doing the same for ‘‘design’’ will put the volume in
different relief.
* * *
Thinking about rational design as essentially equivalent to rational
choice is also useful for mapping contrasts to the design hypothesis.
27

28

Of the remainder, one (Mitchell and Keilbach) does not address uncertainty much at all,
and another (Kydd) does so in a somewhat idiosyncratic way due to the problem being
addressed.
On the chemical weapons case, see Price 1995.

412

International Law and International Relations

Intuitively the idea that designs are choices has three implications: (1)
designers exist prior to designs, (2) designs are intended, and (3) designers
have some freedom of action. Each points to alternative explanations,
some rivals to rational-design theory and some with greater causal depth.
I take these up in turn.
No Designer?
Are institutional designers causes or effects of their designs? On one level
the answer must clearly be causes. Institutions do not come out of the
blue but are designed by people. However, on another level we can also
see the reverse logic at work, with designers being constructed by designs.
To that extent, perhaps more is going on in institutional design than the
rationalist lens captures.29 Designers could be constructions of designs
in two ways, causally and constitutively.
First, institutional designs today may play a causal feedback role in
constructing the actors who make designs tomorrow. This could occur
on three levels. As Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal briefly note, one level
would be institutional designs that expand the set of members who make
up the subsequent designing actor. In their example of the EU, enlargement choices made in the past affected who is making enlargement
choices today, and this will affect who makes choices in the future.30 A second kind of feedback on actors occurs when institutions affect designers’
identities and interests. NATO is a good example: Even if its original design reflected the self-interests of its members, over time they arguably
have come to identify with the institution and thus see themselves as a collective identity, valuing NATO as an end in itself rather than just as a
means to an end.31 *** And third, institutional designs may affect actors
by changing their beliefs about the environment. *** Such feedback
effects may not be intended at the moment of initial design, but the longer
our time horizon, the more likely they will occur. Over time, designs cause
designers as much as designers cause designs.
The rationalist approach can also be turned around in a second, more
constitutive way by adopting a ‘‘performative’’ model of agency. On this
view, associated especially with post-modernism,32 there is an important

29
30
31
32

For further discussion of this idea, see Wendt 1999, chap. 7.
Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal 2001, 778.
See Risse-Kappen 1996; and Williams and Neumann 2000.
See especially Ashley 1988; Campbell 1998; and Weber 1998. For critical discussion, see
Laffey 2000.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

413

sense in which actors do not preexist actions, but rather are instantiated
as particular kinds of subjects at the moment of certain performances.
To the extent that they are not separable, actors cannot be said to cause
institutional designs, but are instead constituted by them.33 In international politics the institution of sovereignty provides perhaps the most
fundamental example. By acting as the members of sovereign states are
expected to act – defending their autonomy, privileging their citizens over
foreigners, recognizing the rights of other states to do likewise, and, now,
engaging in practices of international institutional design – certain groups
of individuals constitute themselves as the corporate actors known as
‘‘sovereign states,’’ which have particular powers and rights in international politics. *** Since this process is continuous, state identity is
always an ongoing accomplishment, not ontologically given.34
* * *
This ongoing process of constructing modes of subjectivity matters for at
least three reasons.
First, it is part of what is ‘‘going on’’ in institutional design, and
therefore a complete understanding of the latter must address it. Doing
this would enable us to embed the rational explanation within a larger
historical process in which institutional designers are themselves at stake
in their practices.
Second, institutional design creates and reproduces political power –
since in making choices designers are constituting themselves and others
as subjects with certain rights – and as such studying the construction of
designers by designs matters normatively. Designing a POW regime helps
legitimate the right of states to make war and thus kill members of other
states; designing a trade regime helps legitimate states’ right to protect
private property even if this conflicts with justice; and so on. ‘‘We’’ might
want states to have those powers, but then again we might not; and our
preference may depend on who is included, and excluded, in this ‘‘We.’’
Constituting states and their members as the bearers of sovereign rights
is an intensely political issue, and so bracketing it in favor of an
assumption of given state subjectivity de-politicizes the design of international institutions to that extent. Calling attention to the effects of
designs on designers is a way to ensure the power of the latter remains
accountable rather than being taken for granted.
33
34

For discussion of this distinction, see Wendt 1998 and 1999, 77–88.
Ashley 1988.

414

International Law and International Relations

Finally, this issue raises questions about rationality. If part of what
institutional designers are doing is choosing future designers, how do we
assess the rationality of the choices they make today? The Rational Design
framework defines rationality relative to a given conception of Self. This
is fine for certain purposes, but what do we do if the Self will change as
a result of our choices? Do we factor in the preferences of future, as yet
nonexisting, designers, and if so, which ones and at what discount rate?35
Attending to alternatives to the assumption that designers are given in
design choices would push these important questions to the fore.
No Intentionality?
A second assumption implied by the Rational Design framework is that
the features of international institutions are chosen intentionally, by
a conscious or deliberate process of calculation. At first glance it is hard to
see what a plausible alternative to this would be, since human beings are
not automatons. As such, there will always be some intentionality in the
process by which institutions are created. However, this does not mean
we can automatically conclude that institutions are intended. In social
theory a long and sometimes fierce battle has been waged by proponents
of a rival, ‘‘evolutionary’’ explanation of institutions, especially Friedrich
Hayek and his intellectual descendants, against the design approach
(which ironically they term ‘‘constructivism’’).36 The intensity of the
resistance stems not only from a theoretical disagreement about what
explains institutions but also from the perceived political implications of
those explanations. Evolutionists argue that in fact it is very difficult to
intend institutions, and that failure to recognize this has led to overconfidence and some of the most catastrophic design failures in history,
namely communism and fascism.37 As an alternative to ‘‘constructivism’’
they favor trusting instead to processes of trial-and-error learning and
natural selection, which operate like an ‘‘invisible hand’’ behind the backs
of rational actors. ***
Proponents of the evolutionary approach do not necessarily deny
that people are intentional beings, that we make rational choices, or
even that we should tinker with existing institutions. Many would best
be described as ‘‘rationalists’’ themselves. Their concern is rather that

35
36

37

For suggestive treatments of these issues, see MacIntosh 1992; and Stewart 1995.
No relation to ‘‘constructivism’’ in IR. For introductions to this debate, see Hayek 1973;
Ullmann-Margalit 1978; Prisching 1989; Hodgson 1991; and Vanberg 1994.
See especially Hayek 1973; and Scott 1998.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

415

even though we may be able to modify institutions incrementally to
better realize our ends, the limits of human knowledge and cognitive
capacity are so profound that we should not think we can intend successful institutions up front. Even the most deliberately created institutions, like the U.S. Constitution, have been amended repeatedly since
their founding. Each amendment to the Constitution was certainly intended at the time it was adopted, but in what sense is the result of those
changes intended, and who was doing the intending? Perhaps the
Founders, whose ‘‘original intent’’ has guided the evolution of the Constitution, and who also consciously created a mechanism for amending it.
But it would be odd to say that the Founders ‘‘designed’’ today’s Constitution, since they could not have anticipated the changes that have been
made; in many respects it is clearly an unintended consequence of earlier
choices. The assumption that institutional designs are intended, therefore,
is ambiguous about whether it refers to the discrete changes made at each
step of the way, or to the development over time of the overall structure.
Intentionality at the local or micro-level is fully compatible with no
intentionality at the global or macro-level. ***
Uncertainty is central to the Hayekian argument, and so the Rational
Design project’s focus on this factor would seem to put it squarely on
the evolutionist side of this debate. Yet the introduction and two of
the empirical articles make claims that confuse the issue. Specifically,
Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal argue that even institutions that have
evolved very incrementally can be explained by the theory of rational
design if their rules have periodically been the object of conscious
choice.38 Their example is sovereignty, the features of which today
are the result of many changes made intentionally to the original
Westphalian rules. Rational-design theory may shed light on some of
the micro-level causes of these changes, but do the editors mean to suggest that sovereignty as we know it today was ‘‘intended’’ in 1648, or
that all the individual designers of sovereignty since 1648 add up to
a single, trans-historical designer? Presumably not, but in that case
then the structure of sovereignty today would require an additional,
nonintentional explanation. Similarly, Mattli argues that the development of international private arbitration can be explained by an evolutionary process whose outcome is equivalent to what would have been
achieved by a direct effort at rational design.39 That may be true, but how
38
39

Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal 2001, 766.
Mattli 2001, 923–24.

416

International Law and International Relations

is it evidence for rational-design theory? The latter assumes rational
actors; evolutionary arguments, in contrast, require no such assumption.
The decentralized, unintended process Mattli describes is precisely
what evolutionists see as a rival to design explanations; it is the structure
of the evolutionary process, not the choices at each step of the way, that
explains the overall outcome. Finally, in response to the criticism that
decision makers may not understand the design problem and as such need
to figure things out incrementally, Mitchell and Keilbach suggest that
a ‘‘trial-and-error process of design, though taking longer, is no less
rational or purposive.’’40 This again seems to conflate the intentionality of
micro-decisions with the intentionality of the macro-result.
Perhaps what these authors are getting at goes back to their functionalism: If, over time, actors make intentional changes to an institution
such that the overall result is functional, we can say it was ‘‘designed.’’
Yet this seems to introduce a new understanding of ‘‘functionalism’’ from
the one underpinning this volume. If micro-intention equals macrointention, we seem to be saying that subjective rationality equals objective (or ‘‘trans-historically subjective’’) rationality. But that cannot be
right. Incremental changes may cause institutions to evolve in an objectively functional way, but that evolution is more a behind-the-backs
process than a purposive one, and as such would have to be explained by
the structures in which intentional agents are embedded, not their
intentions themselves.41 If we continue with functionalist imagery,
therefore, it may be useful to distinguish two variants: ‘‘intentional’’ functionalism, where outcomes are explained by the expected results of
intentional action, and ‘‘invisible hand’’ functionalism, where beneficial
outcomes are explained by structural features of a system. Rationaldesign theory as currently formulated would not explain the latter.
* * *
No Choice?
Finally, ‘‘design’’ seems to imply that designers have the freedom to act
otherwise, that their designs are ‘‘choices.’’ To be interesting this needs to
be more than just an existential freedom. Assuming free will, human beings
always have the trivial ability to ‘‘just say no,’’ even if this means they will
be shot. The claim needs instead to be that actors have genuine choices to
40
41

Mitchell and Keilbach 2001, 906.
For good discussions of these issues, see Ullmann-Margalit 1978; and Jackson and Pettit
1992.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

417

make, especially if we are going to use the aesthetic term design, which
suggests a creative expression of inner desire, where the designer could
have done things differently but chose not to.
Some philosophers have questioned whether rational-choice theory is
compatible with genuine choice, arguing that its model of man is
mechanical and deterministic, reducing actors to unthinking cogs in the
juggernaut of Reason.42 *** Rather than pursue this argument, however,
I will take at face value the assumption that institutional designers make
choices, and focus on how they might be prevented from doing so by
structural constraints. The potential effects of such constraints are captured by two alternative explanations, path dependency and teleology.
The implications of path dependency for functional theories of institutional design have been explored in detail by Paul Pierson ***.43 Especially
when institutions are created piecemeal rather than ex nihilo, would-be
designers may face a substantial accumulation of existing norms and
practices. Such historical structures facilitate elaboration of existing norms
through a logic of ‘‘increasing returns,’’44 and inhibit adopting norms that
would undo them. *** Whether for consequentialist or normative reasons,
therefore, actors may be constrained by existing structures from making
ideally rational choices and as such get locked into a path of institutional
‘‘design’’ that effectively takes away their choice in the matter. ***
The path-dependency perspective suggests a second alternative to the
assumption of choice: the teleological view that institutional designers
are really just working out the details of some ‘‘central animating idea.’’45
This could be interpreted in two ways. One version is that the evolution
of institutional designs is driven in a counter-rational direction by the
unfolding logic of foundational normative principles like equality, democracy, or sovereignty. *** If the EU continues its current (if halting)
institutional evolution in the direction of a federal as opposed to unitary
state, for example, then in retrospect one could argue that its core commitment to the principle of state sovereignty contained within it the seeds
of the outcome (a federal state being more compatible with sovereignty
than a unitary one). At the moment of each decision in this evolution actors
might have the freedom to make choices, but in the end, at the macro-level,
the overall result was pre-ordained. This brings us back to the earlier

42
43
44
45

See Wendt 1999, 126, and the references cited there.
Pierson 2000b; see also Pierson 2000a.
Ibid.
This alternative is raised by Robert Goodin. Goodin 1996, 26.

418

International Law and International Relations

discussions about the relationship between designs and designers, and
design versus evolution. If designers are merely implementing the logic of
norms, what really is doing the causal work here: agents or structures? ***
However, there is another way to spin a teleological explanation that
parallels the volume’s functionalist approach, suggesting that the two
accounts might be compatible. One could imagine a teleological explanation that took as its central animating idea not substantive principles
like sovereignty or democracy, but the principle of instrumental rationality
itself.46 ***
In summary, because the Rational Design project does not engage in
a dialogue with alternative explanations, it is difficult to assess fully its
own explanation of institutional design. ***

broadening the science of institutional design
Up to this point I have taken as given that the question we are trying to
answer about international institutional design is the positive social
science one: What explains the choice of designs? In the rest of this article
I raise two questions that are not asked in this volume – about institutional
effectiveness and normative desirability – and as such my discussion turns
more purely external. *** [Part] of what makes the issue of institutional
design compelling is that it does raise big questions beyond the explanatory
one. These form another kind of contrast space, the mapping of which will
help put the project further into perspective. ***
Let us assume that we want to contribute to institutional design in the
real world to be ‘‘policy-relevant.’’ *** What should social scientists do to
make our study of this issue as useful as possible? In short, what should
count as ‘‘knowledge’’ about institutional design?
To answer this it is useful to step back and ask, what kind of ‘‘problem’’
is institutional design? What do we need our knowledge for?47 There is no
single answer, but any satisfactory one should recognize first that making institutions is about what we should do in the future. In contrast,
explaining institutions is about what we did in the past. By identifying
constraints, explanations of the past may provide some insight into the
future, but the connection is not straightforward. Consider the implications if rational-design theory were a perfect, 100 percent true explanation
of past institutional designs. In that case it would reveal laws of human
46
47

Cf. Meyer et al. 1997; and Boli and Thomas 1999.
Cf. Wendt 2001.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

419

behavior with which we can predict institutional choices in the future.
That kind of knowledge is great for social scientists, but how does it help
institutional designers? They do not need a theory to tell them what they
are already going to do. Ironically, rational-design theory seems like it
would be more policy-relevant if it were false, since then it could be used
normatively to persuade decision makers to be more rational next time. ***
From a practical perspective, in other words, it is not clear what
the ‘‘problem’’ is to which rational-design theory is the solution. In
fairness, this is not unique to this theory: any theory, rationalist or
constructivist, that only explains past choices will be of limited value in
making future ones. This stems from a basic assumption of positive social
science: that the universe is causally closed and deterministic, and so there
must be some set of causes or laws that explains why we had to do what we
did. To be sure, the complexity of the social world is such that we can rarely
know these laws with certainty, and thus our knowledge will usually be
probabilistic rather than deterministic. But this is typically viewed as an
epistemological constraint, not an ontological one. I suspect few positive
social scientists would say that social life is inherently nondeterministic in
the way that quantum mechanics suggests micro-physical reality is; *
probabilistic laws are simply a function of the limits of our knowledge in
a complex world. It is hard to see where human freedom and creativity
come into such an ontologically closed picture, except in the ‘‘error term.’’
In contrast, the basic premise of real-world design is that the future is
open, that we have genuine choices to make, that voluntarism rather than
determinism rules the day. This openness means that the question of what
will happen tomorrow is to a great extent fundamentally normative
rather than positive. ***
In short, there is an irreducible ontological and epistemological gap
between explaining institutions and making them, rooted in their different
orientations toward time ***.48 Interestingly, this gap between backwardand forward-looking thinking is implicit in E. H. Carr’s characterization of the difference between ‘‘realism’’ and ‘‘utopianism.’’49 As is well
known, Carr criticized pure utopianism for ‘‘ignor[ing] what was and
what is in contemplation of what should be,’’ and thus as being too
voluntaristic and dangerous.50 However, Carr’s critique was ultimately

48

49
50

On the difference between prediction and forecasting, which are rooted in explaining,
and ‘‘making’’ as ways of thinking about the future, see Huber 1974.
Carr [1939] 1964.
Ibid., 11.

420

International Law and International Relations

not of utopianism per se, but of utopianism untempered by an appreciation for constraints. In his view pure realism was also problematic
because it was deterministic and sterile, unable to do anything more than
reconcile us fatalistically to the evils of the world. As a result, ‘‘sound
political thought and sound political life will be found only where both
have their place.’’51 Which one should be emphasized at a given time
depends on historical conditions. While sometimes ‘‘realism is the necessary corrective to the exuberance of utopianism, . . . in other periods
utopianism must be invoked to counteract the barrenness of realism.’’52
With the Cold War over, the international community can once again
contemplate the utopian side of life, and this volume brings welcome
rigor to that impulse. Yet the way it has posed its central question seems
still caught up in a realist mentality, oriented toward explaining rather
than making, determinism rather than voluntarism.
*** The different temporalities of explaining and making mean there
will always be a gap between a science of the past and a policy for the
future. If we want to drive forward rather than just see where we have been,
therefore, we need kinds of knowledge that go beyond the causes of
institutional design, and we need two in particular: knowledge about
institutional effectiveness and knowledge about values.
Institutional Effectiveness
Functionalism assumes that actors will choose those institutional designs
that they believe will most efficiently serve their interests. As such, the
criterion for whether or not an institution is a rational choice is subjective
(at the level of the group), namely that it helps them solve their perceived
collective-action problem. ***
However, institutions are designed to solve problems in the world, and
therefore we will also want to know how well they fit or match the reality
toward which they are directed. If institutions perform as their designers
expected, there is no problem. Functionalism would then correspond to
a Dr. Pangloss situation, the best of all possible worlds. But what if
designers’ expectations turn out later to have missed the mark? What if
an institution has unintended negative consequences of sufficient magnitude that had these been known in advance designers would have
made different choices? In short, what if design features are not, in fact,
51
52

Ibid., 10; emphasis added.
Ibid.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

421

functional? In that case institutional choices might have been rational in
the subjective sense, but in the objective sense, a mistake.
Of course, what is objectively rational can only be known after the fact
and so is not fully available to us. However, by studying institutional
effectiveness we can gain some relevant foreknowledge. ***
In particular, understanding institutional effectiveness helps us make
the future in at least two ways. One is by enhancing the objective
accuracy with which design problems are defined, and the quality of our
means-end calculations. Here we can see a partial dependence of making
on explaining/predicting: to be successful the former depends in part on
being able to do the latter. For example, knowing how well different
institutions work might enable us to choose better between what Philip
Pettit calls ‘‘deviant-centered’’ and ‘‘complier-centered’’ designs.53 To that
extent such research would nicely complement this volume’s agenda.
However, understanding effectiveness could also have a second, more
rival impact. What if it turns out that institutions designed according to
the criterion of maximizing expected utility frequently have significant
negative unintended consequences, so that the gap between what seems
functional and what really is functional is often large? In some of these
cases it might still be best to try to maximize expected utility, in the hopes of
getting as close to the optimal outcome as we can. But in other cases,
according to the ‘‘theory of the second best’’ we might be better off not
doing so and adopting some other decision rule instead.54 If learning that
we are often very poor at predicting design outcomes leads us to approach
design in a new way, then the effectiveness problematique would not
complement the Rational Design project’s research program so much as
reconstitute its central concept, rationality. Research into the causes of
design choices might then be led to ask a new question, Why do states
make such irrational choices?
* * *

Normative Desirability
Perhaps even more important than knowledge about what works is
knowledge about what is right and wrong. After all, institutions are
created to advance certain values, and so we cannot design anything until
53
54

Pettit 1996.
On the design implications of the theory of second best, see Goodin 1995; and Coram 1996.

422

International Law and International Relations

we know what values we should pursue. This knowledge is not considered
part of social science as conventionally understood, so some might argue
that its production should not take place in IR but over in political theory
and normative IR. There is something to this; a division of labor between
positive and normative theory is often useful. However, with respect to
real-world institutional design their separation is problematic. Given the
futural and open-ended character of this problem, a science of design will
be more useful if it addresses the relationship between positive and
normative in a systematic way.
Assuming that the empirical support for this volume’s conjectures
holds up, how should we evaluate this result normatively? Is it good that
the designers of international institutions are ‘‘rational?’’ Not necessarily
– that depends on what their designs are for. The possibility that the
institutions set up by the Nazis or Imperial Japanese were rational does
not mean they should be repeated. However, from the perspective of the
Rational Design framework this normative relativity is not a problem
because it defines rationality as purely instrumental. Rationality has to do
with means, not ends, and as such does not itself have normative content.
The belief that instrumental rationality has no normative content
suggests two points. First, note that this belief treats as exogenously
settled many of the most important questions about international institutional design, namely about the constitution of ends. (1) Who should
be the designer? In most cases states are the designers. Is this a good
thing? What about those affected by international institutions? (2) What
values should states pursue in their designs? Wealth? Power? Justice? (3)
For whom should states pursue these values? Nations? Civilizations?
Humanity? (4) What should be their time horizon? Should states care
about future generations, and if so at what discount rate? (5) Should
institutional designs focus on outcomes or procedures? In sum, what
constitutes ‘‘the good’’ in a given situation to which designers should be
aspiring? All of these normative questions are intensely political, and
their answers will strongly condition how design problems are defined.
There are still interesting normative questions left once ends are decided
(some distributional questions, for example), but it is hard not to feel
that by the time this volume’s rational designers begin their deliberations
much of the politics is over.
Second, is it so clear that instrumental rationality has no normative
content? One way to raise doubts would be to invoke Jurgen Habermas’s
concept of communicative rationality, which Thomas Risse sees as an alternative both to rationalism’s logic of consequences and the logic of

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

423

appropriateness emphasized by constructivists.55 According to Habermas, strategic (a form of instrumental) rationality and communicative
rationality exhibit different ‘‘orientations toward action,’’ the former
being oriented toward success, the latter toward achieving consensus or
understanding. An important feature of this difference is that implicit
within it are different relationships between Self and Other, which in this
case could be one designer to another, or to consumers. Instrumental
rationality positions the Other as an object to be manipulated in order to
realize the interests of the Self. In this case Self and Other position each
other as separate individuals, and power and interest will drive their
interaction. Communicative rationality, in contrast, positions Self and
Other not as distinct objects but as members of the same community,
‘‘team,’’56 or ‘‘We.’’ In this case power and individual interest do not
matter (or as much), and instead deliberation, persuasion, and the force
of the better argument take over. To that extent the difference between the
two rationalities may seem to be one of process rather than outcome,
which the Rational Design framework seeks to bracket.57 However, it
matters here because (1) it suggests that acting in an instrumentally
rational way is itself a constitutive choice about who actors are going to
be, which brings us back to the question of performativity discussed
earlier,58 and as such (2) it is a choice that may have normative consequences, distinct from those of the ends that action seeks to realize. ***
*** It is certainly desirable that institutional designers know how to
calculate, but one would also hope they have wisdom, judgment, and an
understanding of the good. These are qualities that a rigid separation of
positive and normative theory will do little to cultivate.

conclusion
A complete, policy-relevant science of institutional design will provide
knowledge that answers at least three questions: How and why have
design choices been made in the past? What works? And what goals
should we pursue? The Rational Design project represents an important
step toward answering the first. It addresses the second only implicitly,
through the functionalist assumption that states will understand subjectively what is objectively rational. About the third this volume is silent.
55
56
57
58

Risse 2000.
On ‘‘thinking like a team,’’ see Sugden 1993.
Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal [2001], 781.
On different design rationalities as constitutive choices, see Dryzek 1996.

424

International Law and International Relations
* * *

One can fairly ask whether a science that combined all three questions would really be a ‘‘science.’’ It probably would not be on conventional understandings of that term. However, one lesson I took away from
this volume is that, if we are to make social science relevant to the
problems of institutional design facing real-world decision makers (and us,
their consumers), we need to broaden our conception of social science
to integrate positive and normative concerns – to develop a ‘‘practical’’ understanding of social science, in both its everyday and philosophical senses.
Different images of a practical social science can be found in work inspired
by Aristotle, Dewey, Buchanan, and Habermas.59 But with the partial
exception of Habermas, these traditions have made little impact on IR,
which continues not only to maintain a high wall between positive and
normative concerns but also to actively marginalize the latter.
One reason for this marginalization is probably the strong influence
of positivism on our discipline, but it has received further impetus from
the long theoretical dominance of realism.60 If international politics is
condemned to be a realm of eternal conflict, then the future cannot be
different from the past, and normative concerns can be dismissed as
‘‘fantasy theory.’’61 The third question that a practical science of institutional design should answer – What values should we pursue? – does
not come up, since we have no value choices to make. The best we can
hope to do is survive, and for that all we need is a positive social science,
one that looks to the past to guide our journey ‘‘back to the future.’’62
In such a closed and deterministic universe the idea of institutional
‘‘design’’ is irrelevant.
Yet this volume’s premise is that states do design international
institutions, that these choices matter, and (presumably) that social
scientists should try to help make them better. As such, its premise is at
least implicitly one of voluntarism and an open future, where things do
not have to be done as they have in the past. To fully realize the potential
of this premise, however, we need to think harder about the nature of
the design problem, its differences from our traditional social scientific

59

60
61
62

See Salkever 1991; Cochran 1999; Buchanan 1990; and Linklater 1998, respectively.
Given its rationalist basis, the absence of the Buchanan tradition in this volume, as
represented in the journal Constitutional Political Economy, is particularly noteworthy.
For a classic discussion, see Wight 1966.
Schweller 1999.
Mearsheimer 1990.

Driving with the Rearview Mirror

425

concern with explanation, and the implications for the kind of knowledge we seek to produce. Driving may be difficult when it is dark
outside, but a science that tries to see the road ahead by using only the
rearview mirror makes little sense, especially if we are building the road
as we go along. The Rational Design project has performed a valuable
service for IR by raising such an interesting problem. Having done so,
the hope is that it will lead eventually to a more forward-looking,
practical social science.

17
The Dynamics of International Law: The Interaction
of Normative and Operating Systems
Paul F. Diehl, Charlotte Ku, and Daniel Zamora

* * *
International law provides the framework for political discourse among
members of the international system. The framework does not guarantee
consensus, but it does foster the ongoing discourse and participation
needed to provide conceptual clarity in developing legal obligations and
gaining their acceptance. In playing this role, international law performs
two different functions. One is to provide mechanisms for cross-border
interactions, and the other is to shape the values and goals these
interactions are pursuing. We call the first set of functions the ‘‘operating system’’ of international law, and the second set the ‘‘normative
system.’’1
The purpose of this article is to describe the basic components of the
operating and normative systems as a conceptual framework for analyzing and understanding international law. We also explore, in a preliminary fashion, the interaction of these two systems, specifically the
conditions under which operating system changes occur in response to
normative changes. We present a number of theoretical arguments and illustrate them by reference to the norm prohibiting genocide and the subsequent steps taken by states to change international legal rules so that this
norm could influence state behavior.
* * *

1

Ku and Diehl 1998.

426

The Dynamics of International Law

427

*** [Most] scholarship has been devoted to how norms arise,2 with
special attention to the moral character of the norm and how it becomes
accepted broadly by the international community. Such scholarship has
not often paid attention to the ways in which the international community has sought to ensure that such norms actually influence state behavior.
Either this was assumed to be a tautology (some argue that behavior
modification is an essential component of a norm)3 or dismissed as a fundamentally different question. Our analysis seeks to assess whether particular factors will likely help or hinder a norm’s effectiveness.
More broadly, our analysis answers the call4 to bridge international
legal and international relations theories. Although not exclusively
concerned with international regimes,5 our analysis has implications for
how regimes are designed and what mechanisms exist for their maintenance. As Slaughter et al.6 indicate, ‘‘effective regime design requires a
theory of why states cooperate through institutional arrangements and
why those arrangements might not succeed.’’ We hope to offer insights
on when states will build institutional as well as other mechanisms to
ensure that regime norms are not empty ideals. In effect, operating
system provisions become a necessary part of the legal regime in a given
issue area. Thus understanding how normative change prompts operating system change could be a major component of understanding the
development and, ultimately, the effectiveness of international regimes.
* * *

international law as operating and
normative systems
International law’s existence today as a collection of rules, prescriptions,
and aspirations governing the conduct of states seems well established.
Yet there seems to be a vacuum of inquiry into the relationship between
the structures and processes of international law and its normative content. Our study examines this by stepping away from the traditional
approaches of sources, hierarchy, or functions of international law toward a concern with dynamics or change in international law. Our approach is to look at international law as a package of related activities that
2
3
4
5
6

For example, Klotz 1995; and Finnemore 1996.
Goertz and Diehl 1992.
Slaughter, Tulumello, and Wood 1998; Beck 1996.
For a review, see Hasenclever, Mayer, and Rittberger 1997.
Slaughter, Tulumello, and Wood 1998, 385.

428

International Law and International Relations

are both structural and directive at the same time. We identify the two
threads as operating (structural) and normative (directive). We chose the
word ‘‘operating’’ as one would conceive of a computer’s operating system.
It is the basic platform upon which a system will operate. When the
computer operating system (for example, Microsoft Windows) functions to
allow the use of specific word processing programs, spreadsheets, or communications software, there is little direct consideration given to that
system by the user. Similarly, the operating system of international law
provides the signals and commands that make multiple functions and modes
possible, and when functioning, often requires little conscious effort. ***
Operating System
The dual character of international law results from its Westphalian
legacy in which law functions among, rather than above, states and in
which the state carries out the legislative, judicial, and executive functions
that in domestic legal systems are performed by separate institutions. The
operating system of international law therefore functions in some ways as
a constitution does in a domestic legal system – by setting out the consensus
of its constituent actors (primarily states) on distribution of authority and
responsibilities for governance within the system. Legal capacity can be
expressed and recognized in terms of rights and duties, and is a major portion of constitutions. Nevertheless, constitutions also provide more. Dahl7
identified a number of items that constitutions generally specify, several of
which are also specified by international law. These include competent
decisions, accountability, and ensuring stability, to name a few.
In order for the operating system to maintain vibrancy and resiliency,
and to ensure the stability necessary for orderly behavior, the operating
system must provide for a dynamic normative system that facilitates the
competition of values, views, and actors. It does so by applying the
constitutional functions as described above when including new actors,
new issues, new structures, and new norms. Who, for example, are the
authorized decision makers in international law? Whose actions can
bind not only the parties involved, but also others? How does one know
that an authoritative decision has taken place? When does the resolution
of a conflict or a dispute give rise to new law? These are the questions
that the operating system answers. Note, in particular, that where the
operating system may be associated with formal structures, not all
7

Dahl 1998.

The Dynamics of International Law

429

operating system elements are institutional. For example, the Vienna
Convention on Treaties entails no institutional mechanisms, but does
specify various operational rules about treaties and therefore the parameters of lawmaking.
The operating system has a number of dimensions or components,
typically covered in international law textbooks, but largely unconnected
with one another. Some of the primary components include the following:
1. Sources of Law. These include the system rules for defining the process through which law is formed, the criteria for determining when
legal obligations exist, and which actors are bound (or not) by that
law. This element of the operating system also specifies a hierarchy of
different legal sources. For example, the operating system defines
whether United Nations (UN) resolutions are legally binding (generally not) and what role they play in the legal process (possible evidence of customary law).
2. Actors. This dimension includes determining which actors are
eligible to have rights and obligations under the law. The operating
system also determines how, and the degree to which, those actors
might exercise those rights internationally. For example, individuals
and multinational corporations may enjoy certain international legal protections, but those rights might only be asserted in international forums by their home states.
3. Jurisdiction. These rules define the rights of actors and institutions to
deal with legal problems and violations. An important element is
defining what problems or situations will be handled through national legal systems as opposed to international forums. For example, the Convention on Torture (1985) allows states to prosecute
perpetrators in their custody, regardless of the location of the offense
and the nationality of the perpetrator or victim, affirming the
‘‘universal jurisdiction’’ principle.
4. Courts or Institutions. These elements create forums and accompanying rules under which international legal disputes might be heard or
decisions might be enforced. Thus for example, the Statute of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) provides for the creation of the institution, sets general rules of decision making, identifies the processes
and scope under which cases are heard, specifies the composition of
the court, and details decision-making procedures (to name a few).
Our conception of an operating system clearly overlaps with some
prior formulations, but is different in some fundamental ways. Regime

430

International Law and International Relations

theory8 refers to decision-making procedures as practices for making and
implementing collective choice, similar to ‘‘regulative norms,’’9 which
lessen transaction costs of collective action. Although these may be encompassed by the international law operating system, our conception of
the latter is broader. The operating system is not necessarily issue-specific
but may deal equally well (or poorly) with multiple issues – note that the
ICJ may adjudicate disputes involving airspace as well as war crimes.
Regime decision-making procedures are also thought to reflect norms,
rules, and principles without much independent standing.
Hart10 developed the notion of ‘‘secondary rules’’ to refer to the ways
in which primary rules might be ‘‘conclusively ascertained, introduced,
eliminated, varied, and the fact of their violation conclusively determined.’’11 This comports in many ways with our conception of an international legal operating system. Yet Hart views secondary rules (his
choice of the term ‘‘secondary’’ is illuminating) as ‘‘parasitic’’ to the primary ones. This suggests that secondary rules follow in time the development of primary rules, especially in primitive legal systems (to
which international law is sometimes compared). Furthermore, secondary rules are believed to service normative ones, solving the problems
of ‘‘uncertainty,’’ ‘‘stasis,’’ and ‘‘inefficiency’’ inherently encountered with
normative rules.
Our conception of an international legal operating system is somewhat different. For us, the operating system is usually independent of any
one norm or regime and, therefore, is greater than the sum of any parts
derived from individual norms and regimes. The operating system in
many cases, after its creation, may precede the development of parts of
the normative system, rather than merely reacting to it. In this conception, the operating system is not merely a maid-servant to the normative
system, but the former can actually shape the development of the latter.
For example, established rules on jurisdiction may restrict the development of new normative rules on what kinds of behaviors might be
labeled as international crimes. Neither is the operating system as reflective of the normative system as Hart implies it to be. The operating system may develop some of its configurations autonomously from specific
norms, thereby serving political as well as legal needs (for example, the

8
9
10
11

Krasner 1982.
Barnett 1995.
Hart 1994.
Ibid., 94.

The Dynamics of International Law

431

creation of an international organization that also performs monitoring
functions). In the relatively anarchic world of international relations,
we argue that this is more likely than in the domestic legal systems on
which Hart primarily based his analysis.
*** [The] operating system has a greater ‘‘stickiness’’ than might be
implied by Hart’s formulations. The operating system may be more
resistant to change and not always responsive to alterations in the
normative system or the primary rules. It is this formulation that suggests,
and makes interesting, our concern with how operating system change
follows or not from normative change. This is not merely a matter of
moving from a primitive legal system to a more advanced one (as Hart
would argue), but of considering how adaptive the two systems are to each
other. Finally, our formulation sees effective norm development as dependent on the operating system or the structural dimension. A failure to
understand this dependence may stall or obstruct a norm’s effectiveness.
Again, the metaphor of the computer operating system may be useful as the
failure of the operating system to adequately support a specific software
application will slow down or render inoperable features of that application for the user.
The evolution of the operating system in all of the areas enumerated
above has been toward expansion – in the number of actors, in the forms
of decision making, and in the forums and modes of implementation.
Although international law remains principally a body of rules and practices to regulate state behavior in the conduct of interstate relations, much
of international law now also regulates the conduct of governments and the
behavior of individuals within states, and may address issues that require
ongoing transnational cooperation. Human rights law is an example of the
normative system regulating behavior within states. Such human rights
law, however, may configure elements of the operating system in that the
human rights granted may convey legal personality onto individuals,
thereby rendering them capable of holding or exercising legal rights. ***
[Participants] in the international legal process today include more
than 190 states and governments, international institutions created by
states, and elements of the private sector – multinational corporations and
financial institutions, networks of individuals, and NGOs. ***
There has also been an expansion in the forms of law. This has led to
thinking about law as a continuum ‘‘ranging from the traditional international legal forms to soft law instruments.’’12 This continuum
12

Chinkin 1989; see also Weil 1983.

432

International Law and International Relations

includes resolutions of the UN General Assembly, standards of private
organizations such as the International Standards Organization, and
codes of conduct developed in international organizations,13 such as the
code of conduct on the distribution and use of pesticides adopted by the
Food and Agriculture Organization in 1985. The concept of a continuum
is useful because these modes are likely not to operate in isolation, but
rather to interact with and build on each other. ***
The forums and modes for implementation have also expanded. ***
Although international law still relies on domestic legal and political
structures for implementation, the international community has also
created new international institutions and recognized transnational legal
processes that have over time become recognized forums in which to
engage in decision making, interpretation, and recently even the prosecution of individuals on the basis of violations of international law.14 Not
only do representatives of states continue to meet to make law, but they
also meet routinely in international settings to ensure its implementation
and compliance (for example, CSCE follow-up meetings after the
Helsinki accords in 1975). ***
* * *

The Normative System
We choose the word normative to describe the directive aspects of
international law because this area of law functions to create norms out
of particular values or policies. Using a different set of analogies, we
could imagine ‘‘normative’’ processes as quasi-legislative in character, as
they mandate particular values and direct specific changes in state and
other actors’ behaviors. References to the term ‘‘norms’’ abound in the
study of international relations, and it is not always clear what is conveyed by a particular construction. In the regimes literature,15 norms and
principles (for example, orthodox versus embedded liberalism in trade)
are broader philosophies of how states and other actors should behave.
Although they tend to be issue-specific (for example, addressing trade or
human rights), regime norms are not generally defined at the microlevel
(for example, precise changes in rules governing certain human rights
13
14
15

Charney 1993.
See Ku and Borgen 2000.
Krasner 1982.

The Dynamics of International Law

433

violations). In this sense, they are similar to what Barnett16 refers to as
‘‘constitutive norms.’’ Our conception of norms is on the one hand
narrower and more precise. We focus only on normative elements that
have a legally binding character, analogous to the idea of rules in the regime literature. Because we are interested in the international legal system,
we are not concerned with acts of ‘‘comity’’ or with so-called ‘‘soft law,’’
which might be appropriate subjects for a broader inquiry of international norms. On the other hand, we have a deeper conception of norms
that goes beyond broad general principles to include specific elements
about behavior. That is, our normative system is concerned with particular prescriptions and proscriptions, such as limitations on child labor.
Our conception of a normative system is similar to what Hart17 defines as primary rules that impose duties on actors to perform or abstain
from actions – but there is an important difference. Hart sees primary
rules as the basic building blocks of a legal system, logically and naturally preceding the development of what we define as the operating
system components. For Hart, a primitive legal system can be one with
developed rules, but without substantial structures to interpret or enforce
those rules. We see a more developed international legal system where
norms may exist without specific reference to the operating system but
cannot function without using the operating system’s mechanisms. Nevertheless, the normative system may remain somewhat autonomous from
the operating system and may even lag behind in its development.
In defining the normative system, the participants in the international
legal process engage in a political and legislative exercise that defines
the substance and scope of the law. Normative change may occur slowly
with the evolution of customary practices, a traditional source of international law. Yet in recent historical periods, normative change has been
precipitated by new treaties (for example, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty) or by a series of actions by international organizations (for example,
UN Special Commission activities in Iraq).* Nevertheless, the establishment
of international legal norms is still less precise and structured than that in
domestic legal systems, where formal deliberative bodies enact legislation.
In contrast to the general terms associated with topics of the operating
system (for example, jurisdiction or actors), the topics of the normative
system are issue-specific, and many components of the system refer to
subtopics within issue areas (for example, the status of women within
16
17

Barnett 1995.
Hart 1994.

434

International Law and International Relations

the broader topic area of human rights). Many of these issues have long
been on the agenda of international law. Proscriptions on the use of
military force have their roots in natural law and early Christian teachings
on just war. Many normative rules concerning the law of the sea (for
example, seizure of commercial vessels during wartime) also have long
pedigrees in customary practice. Yet recent trends in the evolution of the
normative system represent expansions in its scope and depths. Some
current issue areas of international legal concern, most notably with
respect to human rights and the environment, have developed almost
exclusively over the past fifty years. Furthermore, within issue areas,
legal norms have sought to regulate a wider range of behaviors; for example, international law on the environment has evolved beyond simple
concerns of riparian states to include concerns with ozone depletion,
water pollution, and other problems.
* * *
The effectiveness of the normative system, *** depends largely on the
operating system, the mechanisms and processes that are designed to ensure
orderly processes and compliance with those norms and to bring about
change if problems signal a need for change. The normative system may
facilitate compliance in isolation from the operating system by ‘‘compliance
pull.’’18 Compliance pull is induced through legitimacy, which is powered
by the quality of the rule or the rule-making institution. Still, ‘‘primary
rules, if they lack adherence to a system of validating secondary rules, are
mere ad hoc reciprocal arrangements.’’19 Compliance pull may exist under
such circumstances, but it will be considerably weaker than if secondary
rules (related to the operating system) are present. Note that we are
speaking of more than compliance concerns in dealing with norms.
Regime theory has typically assumed that it is the desire to improve the
efficiency of interstate interactions (for example, by reducing transaction
costs) that drives the adoption of normative rules. Our view is that states
adopt normative rules largely to promote shared values in the international
system. Rule adoption and institution creation (largely operating system
changes) may be helpful in implementation and in reducing transaction
costs, but are not a necessary element or purpose of normative change.
* * *

18
19

Franck 1990.
Ibid., 184.

The Dynamics of International Law

435

correlates of operating system change
*** We argue that the operating system does not necessarily optimally
support the normative system. One major question *** arises from this
conceptual framework: How does change in the normative system affect
the operating system? Our theoretical argument specifies several necessary
conditions for normative change to produce operating system change, with
other factors essentially operating as limiting conditions or veto points. ***
There are some assumptions and caveats underlying our analysis
below. First, we focus on operating system changes that succeed normative change. This is not to say that the reverse is not possible or that the
process is not recursive. Obviously, both processes occur, but we want to
isolate and examine the ‘‘norms produce structural changes’’ process as
a first step in understanding the complex interaction. Thus because we
take norms as a given, their genesis (including the influences of structure)
is outside the scope of this study. Second, we assume that the international legal operating system is somewhat ‘‘sticky,’’ and thereby has an
inertial resistance to change. Thus the operating system is not merely
a reflection of the normative system and does not necessarily move in
synchronous fashion with alterations in the latter.
* * *

The Necessity of Necessity
The operating system for international law only changes in response to
necessity. That is, one might anticipate operating system change only
when the status quo system cannot handle the requirements placed on it
by the adoption of new normative standards. There is also the assumption, of course, that states actually want to implement normative provisions, rather than let them linger with largely symbolic effects.
Some of the logic underlying the necessity requirement is related to the
contractualist model of international regime formation.20 In this model,
states cooperate and build institutions to lessen the ‘‘transaction costs’’
associated with the negotiation, monitoring, and enforcement of agreements. In particular, regimes are designed to mitigate the latter sanctioning problems that arise at the international level when seeking to
ensure that states follow certain prescriptions. Thus such approaches to

20

Keohane 1984.

436

International Law and International Relations

regime formation focus on the efficiency of new structural arrangements.
Necessity goes beyond simple efficiency bases, however, and stresses that
the operating system must change to give effect to new standards. Thus
necessity assumes that some actions must be completed (an inherent
increase in efficiency), but it does not presuppose that the operating
system change will necessarily be the most efficient arrangement, and
therefore may fall short of rationalist expectations. The contractualist
approach to regimes recognizes that institution creation is not done in
a vacuum, but rather in the context of past efforts and institutional experiences. Thus the status quo becomes an important reference point for
potential regime alterations. With respect to our concern with the international law operating system, extant system arrangements vis-a`-vis new
norms become critical. Accordingly, there seem to be three separate elements of necessity that may precipitate changes in the operating system:
insufficiency, incompatibility, and ineffectiveness.
When legal norms are completely de novo, and therefore dissimilar to
existing norms, it is likely that the legal operating system does not possess relevant provisions to deal with them. When the operating system
is therefore insufficient to give effect or regulate relations surrounding
the new norm, changes might be expected to occur in that operating system to accommodate the new rules. An example of such change would
include the construction of a committee for regulating the observance of
a new environmental law, similar to the creation of UN’s Commission on
Sustainable Development following the Conference on Environment and
Development in 1992.
Related to the insufficiency of current operating arrangements is their
incompatibility vis-a`-vis alterations in legal prescriptions. The extant
operating system in international law may not simply be inadequate to
deal with new norms, it may be contrary to them. At that point, some
reconciliation is necessary. For example, holding national leaders responsible for torture or other crimes (Convention on Torture) creates new
norms but is incompatible with notions of sovereign immunity[.] ***
Exceptions to foreign sovereign immunity may need to be created for the
operating system to be consonant with these new agreements and the legal
norms embedded within them.
A third variation of the necessity argument concerns ineffectiveness.
Unlike insufficiency, which presupposes the complete absence of relevant operating arrangements, the ineffectiveness variation finds operating
mechanisms present, but not well designed to meet the challenges presented by the new or modified norm. Thus some specific changes in the

The Dynamics of International Law

437

operating system are needed that specifically reflect the new norm. For
example, compliance mechanisms based on reciprocity may be largely ineffective with respect to emerging norms in areas such as human rights.
There, the violation of legal standards by one state has little commensurate effect on the probability that other states will also violate the law
(and thereby impose costs on the original violator). Indeed, reciprocity
concerns may undermine compliance as states implicitly cooperate not
to sanction one another for such violations. This is illustrated by UN
member countries’ refusal to denounce human rights atrocities committed by their neighbors.
Although we argue that some necessity is required for operating
system change, we leave the question of what proposed changes appear
on the international agenda and which actors press for those changes as
exogenous. At this stage, we believe that proposals for change are always
available in the marketplace of ideas. This is consistent with public policy
analyses postulating that there are always ‘‘solutions’’ present in the system,
but these solutions must wait for the right conditions before they are
seriously considered or adopted. Many of those proposals will arise and be
promoted by a concatenation of actors in the international policy process.
These would most prominently include states with a direct interest in
facilitating operating system change (for example, coastal states seeking
compliance with pollution rules), epistemic communities, and other policy
entrepreneurs (for example, international lawyers) as well as international
governmental organizations and NGOs. The major point in this section,
however, is that the efforts of these actors to propose or champion
operating system change will fail unless necessity considerations prevail.

The Impetus of Political Shocks
There is inherent inertia in any political system, and international law
has been characterized as changing more glacially than other legal systems. Accordingly, we posit that some significant impetus must be present before the operating system adjusts to the normative change. That
impetus must come from a significant political shock.21 Political shocks
can be discrete events, such as world wars, acts of terrorism, or horrific
21

The notion of political shocks producing significant environmental change has been
adopted by scholars of American public policymaking drawing heavily from biological
models of punctuated equilibrium. See Baumgartner and Jones 1993. For an application
to international relations phenomena, see Diehl and Goertz 2000.

438

International Law and International Relations

human rights abuses. Shocks might also appear as significant processes,
such as global democratization, that extend over a period of time. All
political shocks, however, represent dramatic changes in the international
political environment, which in turn facilitate changes in the international legal operating system. Of course, the type of political shock one
might expect to see will vary according to the issue area in question.
For example, a shift away from the gold standard might be expected
to affect international economic law rather than human rights law. This
is in contrast to the traditional view of international law as a slowly
evolving body of rules, traditionally articulated by customary law, which
almost by definition presupposes gradualist change.
Political shocks can have a number of effects on international relations and thereby facilitate operating system change. First, political shocks
may radically reorder relations between states, such that previous impediments to cooperation are removed. Previous animosities or divisions
may give way to alliances between former enemies. *** Operating system
change may not have been possible previously because of disputes between states or restrictions imposed by the international environment.
A change in that environment may break down the barriers to the adoption of new policies – or new legal structures or provisions. Second,
political shocks may place issues or policies on the global agenda and
thereby prompt the community of states to take action on them. For
example, some human rights concerns only become salient issues following catastrophic violations. Thus even though operating system change
may be needed, there may be no action until the issue becomes salient.
We know from numerous studies of public policy that while a multitude
of problems exist, only a subset receives government action, often at
the impetus of dramatic events or changes in the political environment
(for example, a new government). We envision that international political shocks perform a similar agenda-setting function with respect to
the international legal system.
Political shocks may have the effect of changing the normative and
operating system simultaneously or sequentially. That is, an initial political shock may prompt a normative change (for example, restrictions on
the use of military force after World War I), and this may include corresponding changes in the operating system (for example, the creation of
the League of Nations and its provisions for dealing with aggression).
In contrast, the operating system change may not result from the same
shock as that which prompted the initial normative change. Thus it may
take another shock, potentially many years later, for the operating system

The Dynamics of International Law

439

to be altered. Thus our model recognizes that normative and operating
change may not be coterminous and provides a specification of the process under which this might happen. As conceptualized, political shocks
provide the necessary, but not always sufficient, conditions for operating
system change. That is, not every political shock will produce an operating system change; some shocks will occur with little or no after-effects.
Although we see operating system change flowing from requirements
of necessity and spurred on by political shocks, two factors may limit or
stifle operating system change even under those conditions: the opposition of leading states and domestic political factors.
The Role of Leading States
Among the most prominent theoretical schools in international relations
is hegemonic stability theory.22 According to this approach, typically
applied to international economics, a system leader and its preferences
define and shape the interactions that occur within the international system. The hegemon also subsidizes the provision of public goods to enhance
the stability of the system. The leading state must have the capacity and
the willingness to produce the resources or infrastructure necessary for the
smooth operation of the system. The United States (following, in some
conceptions, Great Britain) has fulfilled that role for the world since 1945.
If one were to adopt some hegemonic version of operating system
change, then such change would only occur when it was the self-interest
of the hegemon and when that state took the lead in facilitating the
change. This leading role may mean providing the public goods necessary for norm compliance. Yet we are hesitant to adopt the hegemonic
stability model as an explanation for international legal change. The model
has come under intense criticism23 and even one of those who helped
formulate it acknowledges the limited empirical support it has received.24
Furthermore, Keohane25 also admits that a hegemon is neither necessary
nor sufficient for cooperation, and by implication, therefore, for operating system change.
Despite these limitations, there is good reason to consider revised and
more modest elements of the hegemonic stability idea as relevant for

22
23
24
25

See Kindleberger 1973; and Keohane 1980.
See more recently, Pahre 1999.
Keohane 1984.
Ibid.

440

International Law and International Relations

international legal change. That hegemonic stability theory is inadequate
or incorrect does not mean that the behavior of leading states is unimportant. Whether in creating law or institutions or in developing general
standards of behavior (that is, custom), the history of international law
has predominantly been written by Western states, and in particular, the
major powers. In arguing that leading states can arrest or inhibit operating system change, however, we break from hegemonic stability models
in several ways. First, we do not confine ourselves to the influence of one
leading state, but instead focus on several powerful states. No one state
has been able to impose its will on the international legal system. Furthermore, the identity of leading states has often varied by issue area; for
example, leading naval powers have exercised a disproportionate share
of the power in shaping the law of the sea.
Second, we differ in our emphasis on the operating system, as opposed
to hegemonic stability’s preoccupation with norm development. Some
scholars26 have argued that normative change may only arise with the
active support of the hegemon. Our concern here is not with the origins
of normative change, but rather its consequences for the operating system. Yet a hegemonic view of norm origination seems to suggest that
operating system change would automatically follow from the original
normative change. Thus normative and operating changes stem from the
same cause. Nevertheless, we deviate from this perspective. We can conceive of circumstances in which norms arise outside the purview of leading states in the world. As Sikkink27 notes, hegemonic views of norms
have great difficulty accounting for the rise of human rights and other
norms. Moreover, interpretive28 and other approaches29 make compelling cases for the role of nonstate actors in norm formation. Yet it may
be the case that norms can arise without the support of, or even with
active opposition from, leading states in the system.
Nevertheless, leading states may be the major actors determining
whether norms are reflected in the actors, jurisdictional requirements,
and institutions that make up the operating system. Even if we accept
that norm origination requires the consent of the leading states in the
system, it is conceivable that such states may still choose to block operating system changes. Support for normative change may largely be for

26
27
28
29

Ikenberry and Kupchan 1990.
Sikkink 1998.
Klotz 1995.
Keck and Sikkink 1998.

The Dynamics of International Law

441

symbolic reasons (for example, the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights), but without substantive impact. Leading states
may support human rights norms, for example, while also opposing individual standing before international courts and other operating changes
that would facilitate the observance of the norm. If leading states benefit
from the status quo, they may be worse off under an operating system
change and move to prevent that change;30 this circumstance may be
true for many states, but leading states have the power to protect their
interests.
Third and most critically, we see the power of leading states as residing in their ability to block, rather than impose, operating system
change. In this way, leading states can act much as the ‘‘Big Five’’ do in
the UN Security Council: a veto can prevent action, but no state can
compel the adoption of a particular policy. The enforcement of normative rules largely depends on the willingness of leading states to bear
the costs of enforcement.31 Yet strong states have incentives to resist
delegating authority to new institutions, one component of the operating system. Strong states bear greater sovereignty costs associated with
such delegation.32 Furthermore, such leading states may have to bear
disproportionate burdens in providing the public goods associated with
operating system change; the prevalence of free riding and the unwillingness of leading actors to bear those costs may be sources of barriers
to policy change.33
Thus assessing the preferences of leading states is vital to determining
whether and to what extent operating system change occurs. How such
operating system change might affect the strategic and economic interests
of those states is an important consideration. Equally important are the
costs of such change borne by the leading states vis-a´-vis the private benefits accrued to those actors. We argue that change will likely not occur
in the operating system when such an alteration threatens the self-interest
of the dominant states or is actively opposed by one or more of those
states. If this change does occur, however, the change will prove to be
sufficiently minimal and ineffective so as not to challenge the interests of
the dominant states. The necessity of consent from the dominant state(s)

30
31
32
33

Alston 2000.
Goldstein et al. 2000.
Abbott and Snidal 2000.
Alston 2000.

442

International Law and International Relations

can, therefore, be seen as a condition that needs to be achieved before
any effective operating system change takes place.
Domestic Political Influences
Domestic political concerns may act as intervening factors that affect
the outcomes of operating system change. In contrast, some operating
system changes require that domestic legal systems be altered. For example, norms against political torture or child marriage necessitate appropriate changes in the domestic legal systems of treaty signatory states. Indeed,
any non-self-executing agreement requires some type of domestic political action to give it effect. This goes beyond the ratification process,
which may be essential to norm creation. Rather, it involves making
changes to domestic legal systems to accommodate the new international norm. This might involve providing remedies for norms within
domestic legal institutions, altering jurisdictional rules, or changing the
legal standing of individuals or groups to bring claims.
State leaders may be placed in the position of conducting ‘‘two-level’’
games,34 one with international adversaries and the other with domestic
constituencies. Domestic constituencies offer a potential veto point at
which operating system change can be stifled. Even a sincere leader may
not be able to deliver on promises to enact domestic legal reforms. An
insincere leader may actually support the creation of an international
norm but move to block the necessary changes in his/her state’s legal
system for domestic political purposes. Such action permits a principled
stance abroad, and a politically popular or necessary position at home.
For example, the People’s Republic of China signed the Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights but has given little indication that it will incorporate many of the treaty’s protections into its domestic laws. Beyond
leadership incentives, domestic interest groups may seek to block national implementation of international normative changes when their
political or economic interests may be harmed by such implementation.
For example, labor and manufacturing groups in the United States have
sought to weaken the adoption of domestic regulatory mechanisms that
give effect to international environmental agreements.
Thus international legal changes with a domestic component will
be less likely to be adopted than those without this characteristic. One
might also presume that operating system changes requiring domestic
34

Evans, Jacobson, and Putnam 1993.

The Dynamics of International Law

443

action will take longer than those without this restriction, if only because
domestic legislative processes are an additional hurdle to operating system change. Operating system change with a domestic political component may also be incomplete or inefficient, given that such changes must
be adopted by nearly 190 different states; it might be expected that not
all of them will adopt such changes or at least will do so in different
ways and to different degrees.
* * *

illustrating the interaction between the operating
and the normative systems: the case
of the genocide norm
* * *
Genocide is selected as the issue area for illustration in large part because of the breadth of acceptance for the norm in the world community.
Unlike many other areas of human rights, such as economic well-being,
there is less controversy concerning the idea that genocide is wrong.35 This
legal issue area provides us with an opportunity to view operating system
change for a norm in which consensus appears broad and strong, among
the purest cases for analysis. In contrast, norms on the use of force have
historically been more controversial. Another important consideration
in selecting genocide is that it deals with behavior at both international
and domestic levels. Genocide law is primarily focused on the treatment
of individuals within state borders, but changes in statutory limitations
and jurisdictional rights for the prosecution of crimes such as genocide
have had an equally important impact on enforcing human rights norms
at the international level. Although some may argue that the genocide
norm has distant roots in natural law, its development and accompanying
operating system changes are almost exclusively post–World War II phenomena. Thus genocide provides us with a case of norm adoption, much
similar to those in international environmental law, that developed in
the modern era and represents the new wave of international lawmaking.
This issue area allows us to more closely examine a narrow time period,
a more manageable task in this limited space than perusing an expansive
period such as that covering the development of the law of the sea.
35

We, of course, recognize that there is some controversy over the specific provisions of
the genocide norm, as reflected in some states’ initial reluctance to sign the Genocide
Convention or the reservations they attached to their acceptance.

444

International Law and International Relations

We explore genocide by first identifying major normative and operating system changes in the period under study. Yet we do not consider
only actual operating system changes. Rather, we also consider instances
in which operating system change did not occur in some areas or was
merely proposed in the wake of a normative change. *** [This] involves
properly identifying the normative and operating system changes,
specifying their causal sequence, and searching for the major factors
suggested by the approach. Although there are a number of changes in
this issue area, for space and illustration purposes we describe only three,
which are among the central components of the operating system:
jurisdiction, institutions, and actors.
The Genocide Norm
That the systematic killing of national, ethnic, racial, or religious groups –
genocide – was against international law was probably established before World War II. Indeed, some international and national court cases
(for example, Reservations to the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Genocide, 1951) explicitly make this argument. Nevertheless, the genocide norm was solidified and extended (the prohibition
of genocide no longer being confined to wartime) in 1946 with the adoption of UN General Assembly Resolution 96, and codified in the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(1948). Before this time, there were few legal structures with which to
deal with genocide. States had to rely on diplomatic protest or armed
intervention (something not recognized under international law at the
time) as mechanisms to punish those who committed genocide. After
World War II, genocide has clearly been recognized as contrary to international law. Yet most of the debate surrounding the adoption of the
Genocide Convention, and throughout the 1950s, concentrated on refining the definition of genocide and the groups that might be subsumed under the definition.36 That is, prospective changes in international law dealt
more with the normative system than the operating one.
The Genocide Convention has now passed its fiftieth birthday and is
generally regarded as a symbolic triumph of international human rights
consensus in a world of cultural and political diversity. Yet it is equally
regarded as a failure in its ability to prevent genocide or to punish those
responsible. A review of the international law of genocide over the past
36

Kader 1991.

The Dynamics of International Law

445

fifty-plus years reveals a mixed bag of operating system changes designed
to give the treaty effect, as well as many missed opportunities to revise
the operating system toward that same end. Clearly, most analysts regard
the operating system for genocide as weak and largely ineffective.37
Jurisdiction
Article VI of the Genocide Convention lays out the jurisdictional limits
for the prosecution of individuals suspected of genocide. The primary
basis of jurisdiction is the territorial principle, whereby criminals are prosecuted according to where the offenses allegedly took place; territorial
jurisdiction is not necessarily exclusive as criminals might also be prosecuted under the nationality or passive personality principles depending on
national laws. That article of the treaty recognizes the jurisdiction of an
international penal tribunal, assuming one has been created and accepted
by the relevant states. Most notable is the absence of provisions for
universal jurisdiction,38 whereby any state having the defendant(s) in
custody could conduct a genocide trial. Of course, universal jurisdiction
for genocide may exist based on customary law, rather than the Genocide
Convention; some national court decisions (for example, Attorney General of Israel v. Eichmann, 1961) have taken this position, although it is
far from certain that this is widely accepted.
During the past fifty years, there has not been much change in jurisdiction provisions for genocide. The recent war crimes tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda both include provisions for concurrent
jurisdiction between national courts and the tribunals, but international
courts are given primacy. Part of establishing territorial jurisdiction involved creating domestic legislation to make genocide a crime (as provided
in Article V). Yet years later, very few states have incorporated the necessary provisions in their own legal codes. Largely, the operating system for
criminal acts has undergone little dramatic change with the adoption of
the Genocide Convention. What best explains these circumstances?
Necessity for operating system change seems to be present. That necessity does not, however, derive from incompatibility. States may have chosen the territorial principle for genocide because that was the most widely
accepted basis for establishing jurisdiction for other crimes. Rather,
37

38

See Lippman 1998; and American Society of International Law 1998 for a historical
retrospective on genocide law.
Part of what Van Schaack (1997) calls the convention’s ‘‘blind spot.’’

446

International Law and International Relations

necessity comes more from the insufficiency and ineffectiveness of the
operating system to give effect to the genocide norm. As no permanent tribunal existed ***, implementing genocide norms would fall to national
courts. Although there has been a recent upsurge in national courts dealing
with international human rights issues,39 relying on national courts has
proven ineffective historically. The expectation that states would prosecute their own leaders or elites, perhaps for crimes authorized by the
state, is highly dubious. Only when those guilty of genocide are the losers
in a war and the friendly regime is overthrown can one expect national
courts to do the job, as was the case for some war crimes cases in
Rwanda.40 The other possibility is some type of occupation government
that would prosecute those accused of genocide. Even then, note that
a special ‘‘international’’ tribunal was used to try Nazi war criminals at
Nuremberg rather than going through German courts. Given the
character of the crime and the likely perpetrators, ineffectiveness was
an impetus for operating system change and the move toward universal
jurisdiction. Universal jurisdiction is not merely necessary to ensure
prosecution of criminals; its presence may actually serve to make national
courts work better. The option of ‘‘international’’ prosecution may create
incentives for domestic courts to prosecute, lest the prosecution occur
outside of the control of national authorities.41
As we argued above, necessity is not enough to prompt operating
system change as political shocks must be present to spur action. That
condition was present in the genocide case, although not until decades
after the initial adoption of the Genocide Convention. Various political
shocks, including those directly relevant to genocide, took place in the
period following the adoption of the Genocide Convention. These included mass killings in Cambodia, acts of genocide in Rwanda, and ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia. These crises and the calls to hold individuals accountable did indeed prompt calls for changes in the international legal
system. Yet despite the inadequacy of the operating system and the
presence of political shocks, only minimal operating system change with
respect to jurisdiction took place: recent ad hoc war crimes tribunals
have had primacy over national courts in jurisdiction, but only within
those defined areas and frameworks. The reason may lie in the opposition
of leading states to, and the absence of domestic political incentives for,
39
40
41

Ratner and Abrams 1997.
Ferstman 1997.
Dunoff and Trachtman 1999.

The Dynamics of International Law

447

universal jurisdiction, which identifies factors that could block change. It
is also the case that other operating system changes rendered the need
for universal jurisdiction moot.
The United States and other leading powers, such as Great Britain,
opposed a universal jurisdiction provision for the Genocide Convention.42 The fear was that other states would try U.S. and British citizens, for example, for crimes allowable under national law or directed
by the government. Such opposition was enough to prevent expansion of
jurisdiction after World War II, and the opposition of leading states
continues today. In addition, most states have been unwilling to change
national laws unilaterally so as to permit prosecution of crimes that took
place outside of their jurisdiction and by aliens. There are few domestic
political incentives for states to adopt such enabling legislation; after
all, none of its citizens may have been directly affected by the crime.
Furthermore, there are significant risks that one’s own citizens would be
unduly subject to foreign courts if other states followed suit; that is,
significant sovereignty costs might accrue to the creation of universal jurisdiction rules. Overall, the expectations of the model are fulfilled. The
basic conditions for international legal change have been present, but
such change has been arrested by opposition of leading states as well as
domestic political conditions not conducive to the change.
* * *
Institutions
As much of the contemporary debate over genocide has focused on compliance mechanisms, it is perhaps not surprising that the most profound
changes, proposed and actually implemented, center on institutions designed to ascertain and punish violations. It is in this part of the operating
system that the most changes have been contemplated, although the number and scope of those implemented are considerably less.
At the birth of the Genocide Convention, extant institutions were
assumed to bear the primary burden for monitoring compliance with the
norm and dealing with violations. In part, this may be a function of the
available institutions for these purposes, but there was also significant
opposition to proposed new structures. The convention itself contains
provisions (Article VIII) that ‘‘Any Contracting Party may call upon the
competent organs of the United Nations to take such action under the
42

See LeBlanc [1991] on the United States and the Genocide Convention.

448

International Law and International Relations

Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide . . . .’’43 The UN was just beginning to create the operating mechanisms to deal with human rights
violations. The Commission on Human Rights was the logical UN organ
to deal with the problem of genocide, and certainly other organs, such as
subcommittees dealing with the treatment of minorities, would have also
been appropriate. Of course, threats to international peace and security
stemming from and involving genocide could be handled by the Security
Council. Article IX of the convention also provided for referral of disputes to the ICJ.
Although genocide was to be handled within UN institutions, there
were various proposals for a permanent international criminal court.
Indeed, such ideas date back to the earlier years of the century, but opposition from some major states killed those proposals. Although there were
already precedents for ad hoc tribunals (Nuremburg and Tokyo) stemming from World War II, support in the international community was not
strong enough to create a permanent court.
It soon became obvious that UN human rights mechanisms were
inadequate to deal with human rights violations in general, and with
genocide in particular. Throughout the next forty years, various proposals
for special committees or courts dealing with genocide were suggested,
although never adopted. Seemingly recognizing the futility of pursuing
these ideas, the international community began to create alternatives both
within and outside the international legal system. The failure to make
changes within the operating system has led some scholars and diplomats
to suggest that the normative system be altered in ways that enhance enforcement. For example, there has been an attempt to legitimize the norm
of humanitarian intervention – that states could militarily intervene in the
affairs of other states for the purposes of redressing human rights violations or humanitarian emergencies.44 Although not fully accepted, this type
of intervention would provide a mechanism to deal with genocidal acts,
one that is only appropriate if supranational mechanisms are lacking. ***
The 1990s have seen renewed activity in terms of institutional changes
in the operating system. Clearly, the UN system has been more intimately
involved in genocide issues as the Security Council, ICJ, and other organs
have dealt with the conflicts in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. Yet this
43

44

Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. UN6AOR
Res. 260A (III), 9 December 1948, Article VIII.
Chopra and Weiss 1992.

The Dynamics of International Law

449

level of activity is perhaps still below what might have been envisioned or
hoped for at the time the Genocide Convention was adopted. More
significantly, specific institutions have been created to deal with genocide.
The UN created a war crimes tribunal in 1993 to address the conflict in
Bosnia and surrounding territories and then adopted a similar tribunal
a year later in response to the Rwandan civil war. Yet both of these courts
were ad hoc, with their scopes limited to particular incidents. Only in 1998
did the proposal for a permanent ICC finally receive support from a broad
cross-section of states. ***
The critical questions here are (1) why has the international community not been more successful in creating institutions to deal with genocide? and (2) what accounts for the recent flurry of activity in this issue
area? Although it is clear that the theoretical operation of UN institutions remained compatible with the genocide norm, it soon became
evident that such institutions proved inadequate and ineffective in practice. By the 1950s, it was evident that UN agencies would not be able to
meet the requirements for norm compliance for a range of human rights,
not the least of which was genocide. At that point, the push for an operating system change would be renewed or in some cases would begin. Yet
it was more than four decades before such a necessity was addressed. In
large part, it was the political shocks of the 1990s that brought proposals
for an international criminal court back to the international agenda.
The movement toward an ad hoc, and now one permanent, court to
handle genocide and other concerns lies in the political shocks of the last
decade. Indeed, policymakers explicitly cite such shocks as prerequisites
for such occurrences. The UN sees the genocidal acts in Yugoslavia and
Rwanda as the triggering events * while others cite the end of the Cold War
as the facilitating condition. * In any case, it did appear that a dramatic
change in the political environment was necessary for a revival of the international criminal court idea. Either a rearrangement of political coalitions or shocking the conscience of civilized nations (or perhaps both)
provided the necessary impetus.45
The conditions were then ripe for an operating system change in
the form of new institutions, just as they were ripe for moving toward
universal jurisdiction. Yet the international legal system adapted in the
direction of the former, rather than the latter, largely because the
45

Of course, previous acts of genocide in Cambodia did not spur new action. As a necessary condition, political shocks may not always produce operating system change, even
in the presence of other conditions. ***

450

International Law and International Relations

behavior of the leading states and the domestic political factors did not
loom as large as impediments to change.
The United States initially opposed the creation of an international
criminal court. Other important states, such as Great Britain, were also
reluctant to support such an initiative. Consequently, while the idea of
such a court persisted, it did not start on the road to becoming a reality
until recently. This, together with the absence of political shocks, helps
explain why few institutional changes were evident in the operating
system over an extended period. Although the United States has not led
the charge for an international criminal court, it has not actively opposed
its creation in recent years; indeed, the Clinton administration supported
the general concept of the ICC.46 U.S. opposition has related more to
certain provisions for the court, and the United States has sought changes
in the ICC treaty before becoming a party. Thus this position is not
equivalent to active and unequivocal opposition. Indeed, the United
States has also been a leader in pushing for the ad hoc war crimes
tribunals that might be considered predecessors to the permanent court.
In addition, only seven states opposed the Rome Conference resolution
supporting the court, and virtually all of Western Europe, as well as
Russia, voted in favor. Furthermore, except for some opposition among
Republican representatives in the U.S. Congress and segments of the
U.S. military, the creation of such a supranational institution does not
necessarily raise issues of domestic legal changes that might block or dilute its implementation.47 There is also less perceived risk that national
citizens will be dragged before an international criminal court if a state,
such as the United States, does not ratify the ICC treaty or attaches
significant reservations to its adherence.48 There are few such assurances
that personnel would be sheltered from foreign courts under a system
that permitted universal jurisdiction. Despite a lengthy lag time after the
adoption of the normative change, however, operating system change in
the form of ad hoc tribunals and the ICC still occurred.

46

47

48

President Bill Clinton signed the treaty before leaving office, but ratification prospects are
uncertain given significant opposition in the U.S. Senate and less support of the institution
by President George W. Bush.
Except perhaps with respect to extradition; the lack of agreements with some neighboring states on handing over suspects to the war crimes tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia has created some ‘‘safe havens’’ for war crimes suspects.
That perception may be misguided, as some legal opinions suggest that U.S. military personnel may be subject to the ICC whether the United States ratifies the treaty
or not.

The Dynamics of International Law

451

Subjects/Actors in International Law
Identifying the actors who have rights and responsibilities is a major
element of the international law operating system. Traditionally, public
international law has assigned most of these rights and responsibilities to
states, although there is a more recent trend toward raising the status of
individuals, groups, and organizations.49 The Genocide Convention holds
individuals directly responsible for genocidal acts (Article IV), with no
ability to hide behind the veil of the state, consistent with the emerging
operating system change and the Nuremburg precedent. Other than piracy and a few other concerns, such international crimes are unusual
when the norm is to hold states responsible. Yet the Genocide Convention
has few provisions for state responsibility, even though one might expect
many acts of genocide to be committed by individuals acting on orders
from state authorities. Article IX provides for referral of disputes over
interpretation, application, or fulfillment of the Convention to the ICJ.
Yet this avenue has rarely been pursued. Despite efforts of some NGOs,
signatory states were unwilling to press a case concerning Khmer Rouge
killings in Cambodia, and a case involving Pakistan and India was withdrawn after a negotiated agreement between the two states. Only the
case brought by Bosnia-Herzegovina against Yugoslavia (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia, Serbia, and Montenegro, ongoing) has directly fallen under this provision of the treaty. The ICJ has recognized its
jurisdiction over the case based on Article IX, but almost a decade after
the original filing, a final ruling has yet to be made as of this writing.
The major question is why the operating system, at least with respect
to genocide, concentrated on individual responsibility to the neglect of
state responsibility. The inertia of the extant system provides some explanation. Individual responsibility for genocidal acts could fit quite
comfortably with the prevailing territorial and nationality jurisdiction
principles, prevalent in the international legal system for criminal behavior
and reiterated in Article VI of the Genocide Convention. To rely exclusively
on state responsibility would have been inconsistent with extant operating
system practice. State responsibility is usually handled on the diplomatic
level and through claims commissions (note the agreement between the
United States and Germany on compensation to Holocaust victims and
their families) or international courts. Imputing individual responsibility
only makes sense if there are proper legal mechanisms for trying
49

Arzt and Lukashuk 1995.

452

International Law and International Relations

individuals suspected of genocide; yet the operating system still lacks the
evidentiary standards and extradition to make this process efficient.50
Because many of the perpetrators would be committing genocide at the
behest of the state, holding states and individuals responsible would seem
necessary. The provision for ICJ intervention in state disputes over
genocide proved to be inadequate in the long run, given that many states
accepted the Genocide Convention only with reservations that lessened
the likelihood that Article IX on ICJ referral would ever be operative.
The shock of World War II and the Holocaust shaped not only the
normative system changes that were to occur, but also the operating
system changes. The experience at Nuremburg probably led drafters of
the convention to emphasize individual responsibility given the frequent
claims of Nazi officers that they were only following orders and the absence
of any real state to hold responsible (note that both Germany and Japan
had occupation governments). Yet subsequent acts of genocide in Cambodia and elsewhere, shocks in and of themselves, did not produce any further
operating system changes with respect to state responsibility. Whether the
genocidal acts in Rwanda and Yugoslavia will prompt further changes in
actor responsibility is an open question and may depend on the disposition
of the ongoing cases at the ICJ. Thus political shocks do provide some
purchase in understanding operating system change, although they are
suggestive of more change than actually occurred in recent times.
The focus on individual responsibility may be partly accounted for
by reference to U.S. policy, as well as that of its allies and some other
leading states. After World War I, the United States opposed individual
responsibility for war crimes but switched positions at the time of the
Genocide Convention, thus removing an obstacle to system change. Still,
the United States resisted new powers to hold states accountable for actions. It was feared that the United States could be hauled in the courts
of another country, representing a potential threat to the idea of sovereign immunity. This is a fear shared by many other states, including the
People’s Republic of China. The United States did not ratify the convention, even with its narrow focus, until the late 1980s, again indicating
that it was reluctant to grant sweeping powers under the convention.
Indeed, U.S. reservations with respect to the compulsory jurisdiction of the
ICJ led to the dismissal of Yugoslavian claims against it for NATO actions
in Kosovo; U.S. allies also sought to exclude ICJ action based on jurisdictional grounds. Accordingly, there is opposition among leading states
50

Ratner and Abrams 1997.

The Dynamics of International Law

453

to redressing the inadequacies of ICJ supervision of state behavior, and
indeed those states have relied on that inadequacy. Domestic political
opposition, especially in the United States, has prevented any further
expansion of legal powers to act against states accused of genocide. The
UN Security Council remains the primary multilateral mechanism to punish state perpetrators of genocide (and other threats to international peace
and security); the Security Council is also the organ empowered to give
effect to ICJ judgments. The major power veto and the general limitations
of that organization prevent it from playing a major role. With respect
to genocide, states have been reluctant to implement national legislation
to bring other sovereign states before their own courts, fearing reciprocal
consequences for their actions.

conclusion
In this article, we present a new conceptualization of the international
legal system, focusing on it as both an operating system and as a normative system. Our conception fundamentally challenges traditional ones in
international law and international relations. Unlike previous works that
suggest a symmetry between normative and operating systems, we argue
that the operating system does not always respond to normative changes,
and this may account for suboptimal legal arrangements.
There are many theoretical questions that follow from the framework
embodying a normative and operating system. We briefly outline one of
those in this article, namely how the operating system changes. In doing
so, we seek to address the puzzle of why operating system changes do not
always respond to alterations in the normative sphere. A general theoretical argument focuses on four conditions. We argue that the operating system only responds to normative changes when response is ‘‘necessary’’
(stemming from incompatibility, ineffectiveness, or insufficiency) to give
the norm effect, and when the change is roughly coterminous with a
dramatic change in the political environment (that is, ‘‘political shock’’).
We also argue, however, that opposition from leading states and domestic political factors might serve to block or limit such operating system
change. These arguments were illustrated by reference to three areas of
the operating system as they concern the norm against genocide. Clearly,
a more complete model could include other factors, including those specific to the normative issue area involved.
* * *

part vi
LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS

18
Europe Before the Court: A Political Theory
of Legal Integration
Anne-Marie Slaughter [Burley] and Walter Mattli

European integration, a project deemed politically dead and academically
moribund for much of the past two decades, has reemerged as one of the
most important and interesting phenomena of the 1990s. The pundits are
quick to observe that the widely touted ‘‘political and economic integration of Europe’’ is actually neither, that the ‘‘1992’’ program to achieve
the single market is but the fulfillment of the basic goals laid down in the
Treaty of Rome in 1958, and that the program agreed on for European
monetary union at the Maastricht Intergovernmental Conference provides
more ways to escape monetary union than to achieve it. Nevertheless, the
‘‘uniting of Europe’’ continues.1 Even the self-professed legion of skeptics
about the European Community (EC) has had to recognize that if the
community remains something well short of a federal state, it also has
become something far more than an international organization of
independent sovereigns.2
An unsung hero of this unexpected twist in the plot appears to be
the European Court of Justice (ECJ). By their own account, now confirmed by both scholars and politicians, the thirteen judges quietly

* * *
1

2

The reference is to the title of Haas’s magisterial study of early integration efforts focused
on the European Coal and Steel Community. See Ernst B. Haas, The Uniting of Europe
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958).
See, for example, Robert Keohane and Stanley Hoffmann, ‘‘Conclusions: Community
Politics and Institutional Change,’’ in William Wallace, ed., The Dynamics of European
Integration (London: Pinter, 1990), pp. 280–81.

457

458

International Law and International Relations

working in Luxembourg managed to transform the Treaty of Rome
(hereafter referred to as ‘‘the treaty’’) into a constitution. They thereby
laid the legal foundation for an integrated European economy and
polity. * Until 1963 the enforcement of the Rome treaty, like that of any
other international treaty, depended entirely on action by the national
legislatures of the member states of the community. By 1965, a citizen of
a community country could ask a national court to invalidate any provision of domestic law found to conflict with certain directly applicable
provisions of the treaty. By 1975, a citizen of an EC country could seek the
invalidation of a national law found to conflict with self-executing
provisions of community secondary legislation, the ‘‘directives’’ to national governments passed by the EC Council of Ministers. And by 1990,
community citizens could ask their national courts to interpret national
legislation consistently with community legislation in the face of undue
delay in passing directives on the part of national legislatures.
The ECJ’s accomplishments have long been the province only of
lawyers, who either ignored or assumed their political impact. * Beginning
in the early 1980s, however, a small coterie of legal scholars began to
explore the interaction between the Court and the political institutions and
processes of the EC. However, these approaches do not explain the
dynamic of legal integration. Further, they lack microfoundations. They
attribute aggregate motives and interests to the institutions involved to
illustrate why a particular outcome makes theoretical sense, but they fail
to offer a credible account of why the actual actors involved at each step
of the process might have an incentive to reach the result in question.
On the other side of the disciplinary divide, political scientists studying
regional integration in the 1950s and 1960s paid, surprisingly, little
attention to the role that supranational legal institutions may play in
fostering integration.3 Even more puzzling is that much of the recent
literature on the EC by American political scientists continues to ignore
the role courts and community law play in European integration.4
We seek to remedy these deficiencies by developing a first-stage theory
of the role of the Court in the community that marries the insights of
legal scholars in the area with a theoretical framework developed by
3

4

A noteworthy exception is Stuart Scheingold, The Rule of Law in European Integration
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1965). Other early works on the Court will be
discussed below.
The one major exception, discussed below, is Geoffrey Garrett, ‘‘International Cooperation and Institutional Choice: The European Community’s Internal Market,’’
International Organization 46 (Spring 1992), pp. 533–60. ***

Europe Before the Court

459

political scientists. We argue that the legal integration of the community
corresponds remarkably closely to the original neofunctionalist model
developed by Ernst Haas in the late 1950s. * By legal integration, our
dependent variable, we mean the gradual penetration of EC law into the
domestic law of its member states. This process has two principal
dimensions. First is the dimension of formal penetration, the expansion
of (1) the types of supranational legal acts, from treaty law to secondary
community law, that take precedence over domestic law and (2) the range
of cases in which individuals may invoke community law directly in
domestic courts. Second is the dimension of substantive penetration, the
spilling over of community legal regulation from the narrowly economic
domain into areas dealing with issues such as occupational health
and safety, social welfare, education, and even political participation
rights.5 Cutting across both these categories is the adoption of principles
of interpretation that further the uniformity and comprehensiveness of
the community legal system.
We find that the independent variables posited by neofunctionalist
theory provide a convincing and parsimonious explanation of legal
integration. We argue that just as neofuctionalism predicts, the drivers of
this process are supranational and subnational actors pursuing their own
self-interests within a politically insulated sphere. * The distinctive features
of this process include a widening of the ambit of successive legal decisions
according to a functional logic, a gradual shift in the expectations of both
government institutions and private actors participating in the legal
system, and the strategic subordination of immediate individual interests
of member states to postulated collective interests over the long term.
Law functions as a mask for politics, precisely the role neofunctionalists
originally forecast for economics. The need for a ‘‘functional’’ domain to
circumvent the direct clash of political interests is the central insight of
neofunctionalist theory. This domain could never be completely separated
from the political sphere but would at least provide a sufficient buffer to
achieve results that could not be directly obtained in the political realm.
Law *** is widely perceived by political decision makers as ‘‘mostly
technical,’’ and thus lawyers are given a more or less free hand to speak for
the EC Commission, the EC Council of Ministers and the national governments. * The result is that important political outcomes are debated
5

A quantitative illustration of the growing importance of community law is the number of
cases referred to the ECJ by domestic courts. The number jumped from a low of nine in
1968 to a high of 119 in 1978.

460

International Law and International Relations

and decided in the language and logic of law. Further, although we make
the case here for the strength of neofunctionalism as a framework for
explaining legal integration – an area in which the technicality of the
Court’s operation is reinforced by the apparent technicality of the issues it
addresses – the principle of law as a medium that both masks and to
a certain extent alters political conflicts portends a role for the Court in
the wider processes of economic and even political integration.
This specification of the optimal preconditions for the operation of the
neofunctionalist dynamic also permits a specification of the political limits
of the theory, limits that the neofunctionalists themselves recognized. The
strength of the functional domain as an incubator of integration depends
on the relative resistance of that domain to politicization. Herein,
however, lies a paradox that sheds a different light on the supposed
naivete´ of ‘‘legalists.’’ At a minimum, the margin of insulation necessary
to promote integration requires that judges themselves appear to be
practicing law rather than politics. Their political freedom of action thus
depends on a minimal degree of fidelity to both substantive law and the
methodological constraints imposed by legal reasoning. In a word, the
staunch insistence on legal realities as distinct from political realities may
in fact be a potent political tool.
The first part of this article [focuses the inquiry on the more specific
question of explaining legal integration and offers a brief review of the
principal elements of neofunctionalist theory. The second part details
the ways in which the process of legal integration as engineered by the
Court fits the neofunctionalist model.] *** The final part returns to the
larger question of the relationship between the ECJ and the member
states and reflects on some of the broader theoretical implications of our
findings.
* * *

a return to neofunctionalism
An account of the impact of the Court in terms that political scientists will
find as credible as lawyers must offer a political explanation of the role of
the Court from the ground up. It should thus begin by developing a political
theory of how the Court integrated its own domain, rather than beginning
with legal integration as a fait accompli and asking about the interrelationship between legal and political integration. The process of legal
integration did not come about through the ‘‘power of the law,’’ as

Europe Before the Court

461

the legalists implicitly assume and often explicitly insist on. Individual
actors – judges, lawyers, litigants – were involved, with specific identities,
motives, and objectives. They interacted in a specific context and through
specific processes. Only a genuine political account of how they achieved
their objectives in the process of legal integration will provide the basis for
a systematic account of the interaction of that process with the political
processes of the EC.
Such an account has in fact already been provided, but it has never been
applied to the Court as such. It is a neofunctionalist account.
Neofunctionalism in historical perspective: a theory of
political integration
The logic of political integration was first systematically analyzed and
elaborated by Ernst Haas in his pioneering study The Uniting of Europe.6
This work and a collection of later contributions7 share a common
theoretical framework called neofunctionalism. Neofunctionalism is
concerned with explaining ‘‘how and why nation-states cease to be
wholly sovereign, how and why they voluntarily mingle, merge, and
mix with their neighbors so as to lose the factual attributes of sovereignty
while acquiring new techniques for resolving conflicts between themselves.’’8 More precisely, neofunctionalism describes a process ‘‘whereby
political actors in several distinct national settings are persuaded to shift
their loyalties, expectations, and political activities towards a new and
larger center, whose institutions possess or demand jurisdiction over the
pre-existing national states.’’9
As a theory of European integration, neofunctionalism was dependent
on a set of highly contingent preconditions: a unique constellation of
6
7

8
9

See Haas, The Uniting of Europe.
See in particular the following works by Ernst Haas: ‘‘International Integration: The
European and the Universal Process,’’ International Organization 15 (Summer 1961), pp.
366–92; Beyond the Nation-State (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1964);
‘‘Technocracy, Pluralism, and the New Europe,’’ in Stephen Graubard, ed., A New
Europe? (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1964) reprinted in Joseph Nye, International
Regionalism (Boston: Little, Brown, 1968), pp. 149–79 (our citations refer to this latter
version); and ‘‘The Study of Regional Integration: Reflection on the Joy and Anguish of
Pretheorizing,’’ International Organization 24 (Autumn 1970), pp. 607–46. See also
Ernst B. Haas and Phillipe Schmitter, ‘‘Economic and Differential Patterns of Political
Integration: Projections About Unity in Latin America,’’ International Organization 18
(Autumn 1964), pp. 705–37.
Haas, ‘‘The Study of Regional Integration,’’ p. 610.
Haas, ‘‘International Integration,’’ p. 366. See also, Haas, The Uniting of Europe, p. 12.

462

International Law and International Relations

exogenous historical, international, and domestic variables. For present
purposes, however, the principal contribution of neofunctionalist theory
is its identification of the functional categories likely to be receptive to
integration and its description of the actual mechanics of overcoming
national barriers within a particular functional category after the integration process has been launched.
Neofunctionalism as a theory of the integration process:
overcoming national barriers
The actors: circumventing the state
The primary players in the integration process are above and below the
nation-state. Actors below the state include interest groups and political
parties. Above the state are supranational regional institutions. These
supranational institutions promote integration, foster the development of
interest groups, cultivate close ties with them and with fellow-technocrats
in the national civil services, and manipulate both if necessary.
The Commission of the European Communities, for example, has the
‘‘power of initiative.’’10 To have its proposals accepted by the Council of
Ministers, the commission forges behind-the-scene working alliances
with pressure groups. As its policymaking role grows, interest groups
coalesce across national boundaries in their pursuit of communitywide
interests, thus adding to the integrative momentum. Note that these
groups need not be convinced ‘‘integrationists.’’ The very existence of the
community alters their situation and forces them to adjust.11
What role is there for governments? According to neofunctionalism,
government’s role is ‘‘creatively responsive.’’12 As holders of the ultimate
political power, governments may accept, sidestep, ignore, or sabotage
the decisions of federal authorities. Yet, given their heterogeneity of
interests in certain issue-areas, unilateral evasion or recalcitrance may
prove unprofitable if it sets a precedent for other governments.13 Thus
governments may either choose to or feel constrained to yield to the
pressures of converging supra- and subnational interests.

10

11
12

13

Stuart A. Scheingold and Leon N. Lindberg, Europe’s Would-be Polity (Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970), p. 92.
Ibid., p. 78.
We borrow this expression from Reginald Harrison, Europe in Question: Theories of
Regional International Integration (London: Allen and Unwin, 1974), p. 80.
Haas, The Uniting of Europe, p. xiv.

Europe Before the Court

463

The motives: instrumental self-interest
One of the important contributions of neofunctionalism is the introduction of an unambiguously utilitarian concept of interest politics that stands
in sharp contrast to the notions of unselfishness or common goods that
pervades functionalist writing.14 Assumptions of good will, harmony of
interests, or dedication to the common good need not be postulated to
account for integration. Ruthless egoism does the trick by itself.15 As
Haas puts it, ‘‘The ‘good Europeans’ are not the main creators of the . . .
community; the process of community formation is dominated by
nationally constituted groups with specific interests and aims, willing
and able to adjust their aspirations by turning to supranational means
when this course appears profitable.’’16 The supranational actors are
likewise not immune to utilitarian thinking. They seek unremittingly to
expand the mandate of their own institutions to have a more influential
say in community affairs.
The process: incremental expansion
Three related concepts lie at the very core of the dynamics of integration:
functional spillover, political spillover, and upgrading of common interests.
Functional spillover * is based on the assumption that the different
sectors of a modern industrial economy are highly interdependent and
that any integrative action in one sector creates a situation in which the
original goal can be assured only by taking further actions in related
sectors, which in turn create a further condition and a need for more
action, and so forth.17 This process is described by Haas: ‘‘Sector

14
15

16
17

Haas, Beyond the Nation-State, p. 34.
This idea points to an affinity of neofunctionalism with rational choice theories. Selfinterest need not be identical with selfishness. The happiness (or misery) of other people
may be part of a rational maximizer’s satisfaction.
Haas, The Uniting of Europe, p. xiv, emphasis added.
Leon Lindberg, The Political Dynamics of the European Economic Integration (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1963), p. 10. We follow George’s suggestion of
strictly distinguishing those two types of spillover. See Stephen George, Politics and
Policy in the European Community (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985), pp. 16–36. George
also offers a compelling illustration of functional spillover. He argues that the removal of
tariff barriers will not in itself create a common market. The fixing of exchange rates also
is required in order to achieve that end. But, the surrender of control over national
exchange rates demands the establishment of some sort of monetary union, which, in
turn, will not be workable without the adoption of central macroeconomic policy
coordination and which itself requires the development of a common regional policy, and
so forth (pp. 21–22).

464

International Law and International Relations

integration . . . begets its own impetus toward extension to the entire
economy even in the absence of specific group demands.’’18
Political spillover describes the process of adaptive behavior, that is,
the incremental shifting of expectations, the changing of values, and the
coalescing at the supranational level of national interest groups and
political parties in response to sectoral integration. It is crucial to note
that neofunctionalism does not postulate an automatically cumulative
integrative process. Again, in Haas’s words, ‘‘The spillover process,
though rooted in the structures and motives of the post-capitalist welfare
state, is far from automatic,’’19 and ‘‘Functional contexts tend to be
autonomous; lessons learned in one organization are not generally and
automatically applied in others, or even by the same group in a later phase
of its life.’’20 In other words, neofunctionalism identifies certain linkage
mechanisms but makes no assumptions as to the inevitability of actor
response to functional linkages.
Upgrading common interests is the third element in the neofunctionalist description of the dynamics of integration. It occurs when the
member states experience significant difficulties in arriving at a common
policy while acknowledging the necessity of reaching some common
stand to safeguard other aspects of interdependence among them. One
way of overcoming such deadlock is by swapping concessions in related
fields. In practice, the upgrading of the parties’ common interests relies on
the services of an institutionalized autonomous mediator.21 This institutionalized swapping mechanism induces participants to refrain from
vetoing proposals and invites them to seek compromises, which in turn
bolster the power base of the central institutions.
The context: nominally apolitical
The context in which successful integration operates is economic, social,
and technical.22 Here Haas seems to accept a key assumption of the
predecessor to his theory, functionalism, which posits that functional
cooperation must begin on the relatively low-key economic and social
18
19
20
21

22

Haas, The Uniting of Europe, p. 297.
Haas, ‘‘Technocracy, Pluralism, and the New Europe,’’ p. 165.
Haas, Beyond the Nation-State, p. 48.
‘‘The European executives [are] able to construct patterns of mutual concessions from
various policy contexts and in so doing usually manage to upgrade [their] own powers at
the expense of the member governments.’’ Haas, ‘‘Technocracy, Pluralism, and the New
Europe,’’ p. 152.
Ibid.

Europe Before the Court

465

planes. In David Mitrany’s words, ‘‘Any political scheme would start
a disputation, any working arrangement would raise a hope and make for
confidence and patience.’’23 However, economic and social problems are
ultimately inseparable from political problems. Haas thus replaced the
dichotomous relationship between economics and politics in functionalism by a continuous one: ‘‘The supranational style stresses the indirect
penetration of the political by way of the economic because the ‘purely’
economic decisions always acquire political significance in the minds of
the participants.’’24 ‘‘Technical’’ or ‘‘noncontroversial’’ areas of cooperation, however, might be so trivial as to remain outside the domain of
human expectations and actions vital for integration.25 The area must
therefore be economically important and endowed with a high degree of
‘‘functional specificity.’’26

a neofunctionalist jurisprudence
The advent of the first major EC crisis in 1965, initiated by De Gaulle’s
adamant refusal to proceed with certain aspects of integration he deemed
contrary to French interests, triggered a crescendo of criticism against
neofunctionalism. The theory, it was claimed, had exaggerated both the
expansive effect of increments within the economic sphere and the
‘‘gradual politicization’’ effect of spillover.27 Critics further castigated
neofunctionalists for failing to appreciate the enduring importance of
nationalism, the autonomy of the political sector, and the interaction
between the international environment and the integrating region.28
Neofunctionalists accepted most of the criticism and engaged in an
agonizing reassessment of their theory. The coup de grace, however, was
Haas’s publication of The Obsolescence of Regional Integration Theory,
23

24
25
26
27

28

David Mitrany, A Working Peace (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1966), p. 99. Besides
Mitrany’s work, see also James Patrick Sewell, Functionalism and World Politics,
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1966); Ernst Haas, Beyond the NationState, especially chaps. 1–4; and Claude, Swords into Plowshares, especially chap. 17.
Haas, ‘‘Technocracy, Pluralism, and the New Europe,’’ p. 152, emphasis added.
Haas, ‘‘International Integration,’’ p. 102.
Ibid., p. 372.
Joseph Nye, ‘‘Patterns and Catalysts in Regional Integration,’’ International Organization 19 (Autumn 1965), pp. 870–84.
See Stanley Hoffmann, ‘‘Obstinate or Obsolete? The Fate of the Nation-State and the
Case of Western Europe,’’ Daedalus 95 (Summer 1966), pp. 862–915; Stanley Hoffmann,
‘‘Discord in Community: The North Atlantic Area as a Partial System,’’ reprinted in
Francis Wilcox and Henry Field Haviland, eds., The Atlantic Community: Progress and
Prospects (New York: Praeger, 1963).

466

International Law and International Relations

in which he concluded that researchers should look beyond regional
integration to focus on wider issues of international interdependence.29
With the benefit of greater hindsight, however, we believe that
neofunctionalism has much to recommend it as a theory of regional
integration. Although it recognizes that external shocks may disrupt
the integration process,30 it boasts enduring relevance as a description
of the integrative process within a sector. The sector we apply it to here is
the legal integration of the European Community.
The creation of an integrated and enforceable body of community law
conforms neatly to the neofunctionalist model. In this part of the article
we describe the phenomenon of legal integration according to the neofunctionalist categories set forth above: actors, motives, process, and
context. Within each category, we demonstrate that the distinctive characteristics of the ECJ and its jurisprudence correspond to neofunctionalist
prediction. We further show how the core insight of neofunctionalism –
that integration is most likely to occur within a domain shielded from the
interplay of direct political interests – leads to the paradox that actors are best
able to circumvent and overcome political obstacles by acting as nonpolitically as possible. Thus in the legal context, judges who would advance
a pro-integration ‘‘political’’ agenda are likely to be maximally effective only
to the extent that they remain within the apparent bounds of the law.
Actors: a specialized national and supranational community
On the supranational level, the principal actors are the thirteen ECJ judges,
the commission legal staff, and the six advocates-general, official members
of the Court assigned the task of presenting an impartial opinion on the law
in each case. Judges and advocates general are drawn from universities,
national judiciaries, distinguished members of the community bar, and
national government officials.31 Judges take an oath to decide cases independently of national loyalties and are freed from accountability to their
home governments by two important facets of the Court’s decision-making
process: secrecy of deliberation and the absence of dissenting opinions.
29

30

31

Ernst B. Haas, The Obsolescence of Regional Integration Theory (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1975). See also Ernst B. Haas, ‘‘Turbulent Fields and the Theory of
Regional Integration,’’ International Organization 30 (Spring 1976), pp. 173–212.
Haas and Schmitter, ‘‘Economic and Differential Patterns of Political Integration,’’
p. 710.
For a cross-section of the re´sume´s of both judges and advocates general, see L. Neville
Brown and Francis Jacobs, The Court of Justice of the European Communities (London:
Sweet and Maxwell, 1977), pp. 33–48.

Europe Before the Court

467

A quick perusal of the Treaty of Rome articles concerning the ECJ
suggests that the founders intended the Court and its staff to interact
primarily with other community organs and the member states. Articles
169 and 170 provide for claims of noncompliance with community
obligations to be brought against member states by either the commission
or other member states. Article 173 gives the Court additional jurisdiction
over a variety of actions brought against either the commission or the
council by a member state, by the commission, by the council, or by specific
individuals who have been subject to a council or commission decision
directly addressed to them.
Almost as an afterthought, Article 177 authorizes the Court to issue
‘‘preliminary rulings’’ on any question involving the interpretation of
community law arising in the national courts. Lower national courts can
refer such questions to the ECJ at their discretion; national courts of last
resort are required to request the ECJ’s assistance. In practice, the Article
177 procedure has provided a framework for links between the Court and
subnational actors – private litigants, their lawyers, and lower national
courts.32 From its earliest days, the ECJ waged a campaign to enhance the
use of Article 177 as a vehicle enabling private individuals to challenge
national legislation as incompatible with community law. The number of
Article 177 cases on the Court’s docket grew steadily through the 1970s,
from a low of 9 in 1968 to a high of 119 in 1978 and averaging over 90
per year from 1979 to 1982.33 This campaign has successfully transferred
a large portion of the business of interpreting and applying community
law away from the immediate province of member states.34
As an additional result of these efforts, the community bar is now
flourishing. Groups of private practitioners receive regular invitations to
visit the Court and attend educational seminars. They get further
encouragement and support from private associations such as the International Federation for European Law, which has branches in the
member states that include both academics and private practitioners.
32

33

34

It may seem odd to characterize lower national courts as subnational actors, but as
discussed below, much of the Court’s success in creating a unified and enforceable
community legal system has rested on convincing lower national courts to leapfrog the
national judicial hierarchy and work directly with the ECJ. See Mary L. Volcansek,
Judicial Politics in Europe (New York: Peter Lang, 1986), pp. 245–67; and John Usher,
European Community Law and National Law (London: Allen and Unwin, 1981).
Hjalte Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice : A Comparative
study in Judicial Policymaking (Dortrecht: M. Nijhoff, 1986), p. 245.
The Court’s rules allow member states to intervene to state their position in any case they
deem important, but this provision is regularly underutilized.

468

International Law and International Relations

Smaller practitioners’ groups connected with national bar associations
also abound.35 The proliferation of community lawyers laid the foundation for the development of a specialized and highly interdependent
community above and below the level of member state governments. The
best testimony on the nature of the ties binding that community comes
from a leading EC legal academic and editor of the Common Market Law
Review, Henry Schermers. In a recent tribute to a former legal advisor to
the commission for his role in ‘‘building bridges between [the Commission], the Community Court and the practitioners,’’ Schermers wrote,
Much of the credit for the Community legal order rightly goes to the Court of
Justice of the European Communities, but the Court will be the first to recognize
that they do not deserve all the credit. Without the loyal support of the national
judiciaries, preliminary questions would not have been asked nor preliminary
rulings followed. And the national judiciaries themselves would not have entered
into Community law had not national advocates pleaded it before them. For the
establishment and growth of the Community legal order it was essential for the
whole legal profession to become acquainted with the new system and its
requirements. Company lawyers, solicitors and advocates had to be made aware
of the opportunities offered to them by the Community legal system.36

In this tribute, Schermers points to another important set of subnational
actors: community law professors. These academics divide their time
between participation as private consultants on cases before the court and
extensive commentary on the Court’s decisions. In addition to book-length
treatises, they edit and contribute articles to a growing number of
specialized journals devoted exclusively to EC law.37 As leading figures
in their own national legal and political communities, they play a critical
role in bolstering the legitimacy of the Court.

Motives: the self-interest of judges, lawyers, and professors
The glue that binds this community of supra- and subnational actors is
self-interest. In the passage quoted above, Schermers speaks of making

35
36

37

See Brown and Jacobs, The Court of Justice of the European Communities, pp. 180–181.
Henry Schermers, ‘‘Special Foreword,’’ Common Market Law Review, no. 27, 1990,
pp. 637–38.
Prominent examples include The Common Market Law Review, The European Law
Review, Yearbook of European Law, Legal Issues of European Integration, Cahier de
Droit Europe´en, Revue trimestrielle de Droit Europe´en, and Europarecht. A vast number
of American international and comparative law journals also publish regular articles on
European law.

Europe Before the Court

469

private practitioners aware of the ‘‘opportunities’’ offered to them by the
community legal system. The Court largely created those opportunities,
providing personal incentives for individual litigants, their lawyers, and
lower national courts to participate in the construction of the community
legal system. In the process, it enhanced its own power and the professional
interests of all parties participating directly or indirectly in its business.
Giving individual litigants a personal stake in community law
The history of the ‘‘constitutionalization’’ of the Treaty of Rome, and of
the accompanying ‘‘legalization’’ of community secondary legislation, is
essentially the history of the direct effect doctrine. And, the history of the
direct effect doctrine is the history of carving individually enforceable
rights out of a body of rules apparently applicable only to states. In
neofunctionalist terms, the Court created a pro-community constituency
of private individuals by giving them a direct stake in promulgation
and implementation of community law. Further, the Court was careful to
create a one-way ratchet by permitting individual participation in the
system only in a way that would advance community goals.
The Court began by prohibiting individuals from seeking to annul legal
acts issued by the Council of Ministers or the EC Commission for
exceeding their powers under the Treaty of Rome. As noted above, Article
173 of the treaty appears to allow the council, the commission, the member states, and private parties to seek such an injunction. In 1962, however, the Court held that individuals could not bring such actions except
in the narrowest of circumstances.38 A year later the Court handed down
its landmark decision in Van Gend & Loos, allowing a private Dutch
importer to invoke the common market provisions of the treaty directly
against the Dutch government’s attempt to impose customs duties on
specified imports.39 Van Gend announced a new world. Over the explicit
objections of three of the member states, the Court proclaimed:
the Community constitutes a new legal order . . . for the benefit of which the
states have limited their sovereign rights, albeit within limited fields, and the
subjects of which comprise not only Member States but also their nationals.
Independently of the legislation of the Member States, Community law therefore
38

39

See Case 25/62, Plaumann & Co. v. Commission of the European Economic Community,
European Court Reports (ECR), 1963, p. 95. See also Hjalte Rasmussen, ‘‘Why is Article
173 Interpreted Against Private Plaintiffs?’’ European Law Review, no. 5, 1980,
pp. 112–27.
Case 26/62, N.V. Algemene Transport & Expeditie Onderneming Van Gend & Loos v.
Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen, ECR, 1963, p. 1.

470

International Law and International Relations

not only imposes obligations on individuals but it also intended to confer upon
them rights which become part of their legal heritage. These rights arise not only
where they are expressly granted by the Treaty, but also by reason of obligations
which the Treaty imposes in a clearly defined way upon individuals as well as
upon the Member States and upon the institutions of the Community.40

The Court effectively articulated a social contract for the EC, relying
on the logic of mutuality to tell community citizens that since community
law would impose new duties of citizenship flowing to an entity other than
their national governments, which had now relinquished some portion of
their sovereignty, they must be entitled to corresponding rights. Beneath
the lofty rhetoric, however, was the creation of a far more practical set of
incentives pushing toward integration. Henceforth importers around the
community who objected to paying customs duties on their imports could
invoke the Treaty of Rome to force their governments to live up to their
commitment to create a common market.
The subsequent evolution of the direct effect doctrine reflects the steady
expansion of its scope. Eric Stein offers the best account,41 charting the
extension of the doctrine from a ‘‘negative’’ treaty obligation to a ‘‘positive’’ obligation42; from the ‘‘vertical’’ enforcement of a treaty obligation
against a member state government to the ‘‘horizontal’’ enforcement of
such an obligation against another individual43; from the application
only to treaty law to the much broader application to secondary
community legislation, such as council directives and decisions.44 After
vociferous protest from national courts,45 the Court did balk temporarily
at granting horizontal effect to community directives – allowing individuals to enforce obligations explicitly imposed by council directives on
member states against other individuals – but has subsequently permitted
40
41

42
43

44

45

Ibid., p. 12, emphasis added.
See Eric Stein, ‘‘Lawyers, Judges, and the Making of a Transnational Constitution,’’
American Journal of International Law 75 (January 1981), pp. 1–27.
Case 57/65, Alfons Lu¨tticke GmbH v. Hauptzollamt Saarlouis, ECR, 1986, p. 205.
See Case 36/74, B.N.O. Walrave and L.J.N. Koch v. Association Union Cycliste
Internationale, ECR, 1974, p. 1405; and Case 149/77, Gabrielle Defrenne v. Societe
Anonyme Belge de Navigation Aerienne Sabena, ECR, 1978, p. 1365.
See Case 9/70, Franz Grad v. Finanzamt Traunstein, ECR, 1970, p. 825; and Case 411/
74, Yvonne Van Duyn v. Home Office, ECR, 1974, p. 1337.
Bundesfinanzhof, decision of 25 April 1985 (VR 123/84), Entscheidungen des Bundesfinanzhofes, vol. 143, p. 383 (noted by H. Gerald Crossland, European Law Review, 1986,
pp. 476–79). The decision was quashed by the Bundesverfassungsgericht (the German
Constitutional Court) in its decision of 8 April 1987 (2 BvR 687/85), [1987] Recht der
Internationalen Wirtschaft 878. See also the Cohn Bendit case, Conseil d’Etat, 22
December 1978, Dalloz, 1979, p. 155.

Europe Before the Court

471

even these actions where member governments have failed to implement
a directive correctly or in a timely fashion.46
Without tracking the intricacies of direct effect jurisprudence any
further, it suffices to note that at every turn the Court harped on
the benefits of its judgments for individual citizens of the community. In
Van Duyn, for instance, the Court observed: ‘‘A decision to this effect
(granting direct effect to community directives) would undoubtedly
strengthen the legal protection of individual citizens in the national
courts.’’47 Conversely, of course, individuals are the best means of holding
member states to their obligations. ‘‘Where Community authorities have,
by directive, imposed on Member states the obligation to pursue a particular course of conduct, the useful effect of such an act would be
weakened if individuals were prevented from relying on it before their
national courts and if the latter were prevented from taking it into
consideration as an element of Community law.’’48
The net result of all these cases is that individuals (and their lawyers)
who can point to a provision in the community treaties or secondary
legislation that supports a particular activity they wish to undertake – from
equal pay for equal work to a lifting of customs levies – can invoke
community law and urge a national court to certify the question of whether
and how community law should be applied to the ECJ. When litigants did
not appear to perceive the boon that had been granted them, moreover, the
Court set about educating them in the use of the Article 177 procedure.49
The Court thus constructed a classically utilitarian mechanism and put it
to work in the service of community goals. Citizens who are net losers
from integrative decisions by the council or the commission cannot sue to
have those actions declared ultra vires. But citizens who stand to gain
have a constant incentive to push their governments to live up to paper
46

47
48

49

See Case 152/84, Marshall v. Southampton and South West Hampshire Area Health
Authority (Teaching), Common Market Law Review, vol. 1, 1986, p. 688; and Case 152/
84, ECR, 1986, p. 737. On the relationship between Marshall and Marleasing, see Hjalte
Rasmussen, ‘‘The Role of the Court in the European Community: Towards a Normative
Theory of Interpretation of Community Law,’’ University of Chicago Legal Forum.
Van Duyn, p. 1342.
Ibid., p. 1348. For a discussion of more recent cases in which the Court explicitly has
carved out individual rights in the enforcement of community directives, see Deirdre
Curtin, ‘‘Directives: The Effectiveness of Judicial Protection of Individual Rights,’’
Common Market Law Review, vol. 27, 1990, pp. 709–39.
Mancini describes this process in great detail; see G. Federico Mancini, ‘‘The Making of
a Constitution for Europe,’’ Common Market Law Review, vol. 26, 1989, pp. 605–6. See
also Pierre Pescatore, The Law of Integration, (Leyden : Sijthoss, 1974), p. 99; and
Rasmussen, On law and Policy in the European Court of Justice, p. 247.

472

International Law and International Relations

commitments.50 As Haas argued in 1964, a successful international
organization can achieve ‘‘growth through planning . . . only on the
basis of stimulating groups and governments in the environment to
submit new demands calling for organizational action.’’51
Courting the national courts
The entire process of increasing the use of the Article 177 procedure was
an exercise in convincing national judges of the desirability of using the ECJ.
Through seminars, dinners, regular invitations to Luxembourg, and visits
around the community, the ECJ judges put a human face on the institutional
links they sought to build.52 Many of the Court’s Article 177 opinions
reenforced the same message. It was a message that included a number of
components designed to appeal to the self-interest primarily of the lower
national courts. It succeeded ultimately in transforming the European legal
system into a split system, in which these lower courts began to recognize
two separate and distinct authorities above them: their own national
supreme courts, on questions of national law, and the ECJ, on questions of
European law. Judge Mancini explains quite candidly that the ECJ needed
the ‘‘cooperation and goodwill of the state courts.’’53
Shapiro expresses surprise at the willingness of lower national courts to
invoke Article 177 against the interests of their own national supreme
courts, noting that lower court judges ‘‘must attend to their career
prospects within hierarchically organized national judicial systems.’’54
50

51
52

53

54

More prosaically, but no less effectively for the construction of a community legal system,
the Article 177 procedure offers ‘‘clever lawyers and taticians . . . the possibility of using
Community law to mount challenges to traditional local economic restrictions in a way
which may keep open a window of trading opportunity whilst the legal process grinds
away.’’ In a word, delay. See L. Gormley, ‘‘Recent Case Law on the Free Movement of
Goods: Some Hot Potatoes,’’ Common Market Law Review, vol. 27, 1990, pp. 825–57.
Haas, Beyond the Nation-State, p. 128.
Rasmussen describes a ‘‘generous information campaign,’’ as a result of which a steadily
increasing number of national judges traveled to the Palais de Justice, at the ECJ’s
expense, for conferences about the court and the nature of the Article 177 procedure.
See Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice, p. 247.
Mancini, ‘‘The Making of a Constitution for Europe,’’ p. 605. In this regard, Mary
Volcansek offers an interesting discussion of the various ‘‘follow-up mechanisms’’ the ECJ
employed to further an ongoing partnership with the national courts, including positive
feedback whenever possible and gradual accommodation of the desire occasionally to
interpret community law for themselves. See Volcansek, Judicial Politics in Europe,
pp. 264–66.
Martin Shapiro, ‘‘The European Court of Justice,’’ in Alberta M. Sbragia, ed., Europolitics: Institutions and Policymaking in the New European Community (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1991), p. 127.

Europe Before the Court

473

Weiler offers several explanations, beginning with the legitimacy of ECJ
decisions conferred by the national prestige of individual judges and the
precise reasoning of the opinions themselves. He ultimately concludes,
however, that the ‘‘legally driven constitutional revolution’’ in the EC is
‘‘a narrative of plain and simple judicial empowerment.’’55 And further,
that ‘‘the E.C. system gave judges at the lowest level powers that had been
reserved to the highest court in the land.’’ For many, ‘‘to have de facto
judicial review of legislation . . . would be heady stuff.’’56
Perhaps the best evidence for this ‘‘narrative of empowerment’’
comes from the ECJ itself. Many of the opinions are carefully crafted
appeals to judicial ego. In Van Gend & Loos itself the Belgian and Dutch
governments had argued that the question of the application of the Treaty
of Rome over Dutch or Belgian law was solely a question for the Belgian
and Dutch national courts. The ECJ responded by announcing, in
effect, that the entire case was a matter solely between the national
courts and the ECJ, to be resolved without interference from the national
governments. When the Belgian government objected that the question
of European law referred by the national court could have no bearing on
the outcome of the proceedings, the ECJ piously responded that it was
not its business to review the ‘‘considerations which may have led
a national court or tribunal to its choice of questions as well as the
relevance which it attributes to such questions.’’57 In this and subsequent
direct effect cases the ECJ continually suggested that the direct effect of
community law should depend on judicial interpretation rather than
legislative action.58
Finally, in holding that a national court’s first loyalty must be to the ECJ
on all questions of community law,59 the Court was able simultaneously
to appeal to national courts in their role as protectors of individual

55

56

57
58

59

Joseph Weiler, ‘‘The Transformation of Europe,’’ Yale Law Journal 100 (June 1991),
p. 2426.
Ibid. Anecdotal evidence also suggests that lower national courts who refer questions to
the ECJ save themselves the work of deciding the case themselves and simultaneously
protect against the chance of reversal.
Van Gend & Loos, p. 22.
See, e.g., Lu¨tticke, p. 10, where the ECJ announced that the direct effect of the treaty
article in question depends solely on a finding by the national court; see also Case 33/76
Rewe-Zentralfinanz Gesellschaft and Rewe-Zentral AG v. Landwirtschaftskammer fur
das Saarland, ECR, 1989, p. 1998; and Case 45/76 Comet BV v. Produktschap voor
Siergewassen, ECR, 1976, pp. 2052–53.
Case 106/77, Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Sirnmenthal S.p. A. [1978]
ECR 629.

474

International Law and International Relations

rights – a very effective dual strategy.60 Such argumentation simultaneously strengthens the force of the Court’s message to national courts by
portraying the construction of the European legal system as simply a continuation of the traditional role of European courts and, indeed, liberal
courts everywhere: the protection of individual rights against the state. At
the same time, as discussed above, the Court strengthens its own claim to
perform that role, building a constituency beyond the Brussels bureaucracy.
Reciprocal Empowerment
This utilitarian depiction of the integration process must include the
ECJ itself. It is obvious that any measures that succeed in raising the
visibility, effectiveness, and scope of EC law also enhance the prestige and
power of the Court and its members, both judges and advocates general. In
addition, however, by presenting itself as the champion of individual
rights and the protector of the prerogatives of lower national courts,
the ECJ also burnishes its own image and gives its defenders weapons
with which to rebut charges of antidemocratic activism. Rasmussen
points out that the encouragement to use Article 177 procedure meant
that the Court visibly sided with ‘‘the little guy,’’ the underdog against
state bureaucracies, ‘‘the ‘people’ against the ‘power-elite’.’’61 Strikingly enough, this is a characterization with which Judge Koenrad Lenaerts
essentially concurs.62
The empowerment of the ECJ with respect to the national courts is
more subtle. While offering lower national courts a ‘‘heady’’ taste of
power, the ECJ simultaneously strengthens its own legal legitimacy by
making it appear that its own authority flows from the national courts.
It is the national courts, after all, who have sought its guidance; and it
is the national courts who will ultimately decide the case, in the sense of
issuing an actual ruling on the facts. The ECJ only ‘‘interprets’’ the
relevant provision of community law, and leaves it for the national court
to apply it to the facts of the case. In practice, of course, the ECJ frequently offers a virtual template for the subsequent lower court decision.63 But, the all-important fiction is preserved.
60
61
62

63

Ibid., p. 643.
Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice, p. 245.
See Koenrad Lenaerts, ‘‘The Role of the Court of Justice in the European Community:
Some Thoughts About the Interaction Between Judges and Politicians,’’ University of
Chicago Legal Forum.
For a number of specific examples, see Ulrich Everling, ‘‘The Court of Justice as a
Decisionmaking Authority,’’ Michigan Law Review 82 (April/May 1984), pp. 1299–
1301.

Europe Before the Court

475

Finally, the empowerment of the ECJ simultaneously empowers all
those who make their living by analyzing and critiquing its decisions.
Here community law professors and their many assistants join with
members of the community bar to form a communitywide network of
individuals with a strong stake in bolstering the Court’s prestige. On the
most basic level, the growing importance of community law translates
into a growing demand for professors to teach it and hence, funding for
chaired professorships.64 The holders of these chairs are likely, in turn, to
aspire to become judges and advocates general themselves, just as many
current judges and advocates general are likely to return to the professoriate when their terms expire. This is a neofunctionalist interest
group par excellence.
Process
As discussed above, the neofunctionalist description of the actual process
of integration focused on three major features: functional spillover,
political spillover, and upgrading of common interests. All three dynamics
are clearly present in the building of the EC legal system.
Functional spillover: the logic of law
Functional spillover presupposes the existence of an agreed objective and
simply posits that the jurisdiction of the authorities charged with
implementing that objective will expand as necessary to address whatever
obstacles stand in the way. This expansion will continue as long as those
authorities do not collide with equally powerful countervailing interests.
Alternatively, of course, one objective might conflict with another
objective. Such limits define the parameters within which this ‘‘functionalist’’ logic can work.
In the construction of a community legal system, such limits were
initially very few, and the functional logic was very strong. Judge Pierre
Pescatore has attributed the ECJ’s success in creating a coherent and
authoritative body of community law to the Court’s ability – flowing
from the structure and content of the Treaty of Rome – to use ‘‘constructive methods of interpretation.’’65 One of the more important of those

64

65

The ‘‘Jean Monnet Action,’’ a program of the European Commission, has recently created
fifty-seven new full-time teaching posts in community law as part of a massive program
to create new courses in European integration.
Pescatore, The Law of Integration, pp. 89–90.

476

International Law and International Relations

methods is the ‘‘systematic method,’’ drawing on ‘‘the various systematic
elements on which Community law is based: general scheme of the
legislation, structure of the institutions, arrangement of powers . . . ,
general concepts and guiding ideals of the Treaties. Here is a complete
‘architecture,’ coherent and well thought out, the lines of which, once
firmly drawn, require to be extended.’’66 Interpretation according to
the systematic method means filling in areas of the legal structure that
logically follow from the parts of the structure already built.
A well-known set of examples confirms the power of this functional
logic as applied by the ECJ. After Van Gend & Loos, the next major
‘‘constitutional’’ case handed down was Costa v. Enel, which established
the supremacy of community law over national law. In plain terms, Costa
asserted that where a treaty term conflicted with a subsequent national
statute, the treaty must prevail. Predictably, Judge Federico Mancini
justifies this decision by reference to the ruin argument.67 He argues
further, however, that the supremacy clause ‘‘was not only an indispensable development, it was also a logical development.’’68 Students of
federalism have long recognized that the clash of interests between state
and federal authorities can be mediated in several ways: either (1) by
allowing state authorities to implement federal directives at the time and
in the manner they desire, or (2) by allowing both state and federal
authorities to legislate directly, which entails formulating guidelines to
establish a hierarchy between the two. On this basis, Mancini (and Eric
Stein before him) points out that because the Court had ‘‘enormously
extended the Community power to deal directly with the public’’ in Van
Gend & Loos, it now became logically necessary to insist that community
law must prevail over member state law in cases of conflict.69 In short, the
‘‘full impact of direct effect’’ can only be realized ‘‘in combination with’’
the supremacy clause.70
The evolution of community law also has manifested the substantive broadening typical of functional spillover. EC law is today no longer as dominantly economic in character as in the 1960s.71 It has spilled
66
67
68
69
70

71

Ibid., p. 87, emphasis added.
Mancini, ‘‘The Making of a Constitution for Europe,’’ p. 600.
Ibid.
Ibid., p. 601.
This is the way Joseph Weiler describes the supremacy cases, again tacitly emphasizing
a necessary logical progression. See Weiler, ‘‘The Transformation of Europe,’’ p. 2414.
Neil Nugent, The Government and Politics of the European Community (Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press, 1989), p. 151.

Europe Before the Court

477

over into a variety of domains dealing with issues such as health and
safety at work, entitlements to social welfare benefits, mutual recognition
of educational and professional qualification, and, most recently, even
political participation rights.72 Two notable examples are equal treatment with respect to social benefits of workers, a field developed
almost entirely as a result of Court decisions,73 and the general system
of community trademark law – again formed entirely by the Court’s
case law.74 In both areas the Court gradually extended its reach by
grounding each new decision on the necessity of securing the common
market.
Political spillover: ‘‘transnational incrementalism’’
The neofunctionalists argued that integration was an adaptive process of
gradually shifting expectations, changing loyalties, and evolving values.75
In trying to explain why member states responded positively to the
Court’s legal innovations, Joseph Weiler writes: ‘‘it is clear that a measure
of transnational incrementalism developed. Once some of the highest
courts of a few Member States endorsed the new constitutional construct,
their counterparts in other Member States heard more arguments that
those courts should do the same, and it became more difficult for national
courts to resist the trend with any modicum of credibility.’’76
Beyond the Court’s specific machinations, however, law operates as
law by shifting expectations. The minute a rule is established as ‘‘law,’’
individuals are entitled to rely upon the assumption that social, economic,
or political behavior will be conducted in accordance with that rule. The
creation and application of law is inherently a process of shifting expectations. A major function of a legal rule is to provide a clear and certain
standard around which expectations can crystallize.

72

73

74

75
76

See ‘‘Council Directive on Voting Rights for Community Nationals in Local Elections in
Their Member States of Residence,’’ Official Journal, 1988, C 256/4, and Amended
Proposal, Official Journal, 1989, C 290/4.
For further reading, see Paul Leleux, ‘‘The Role of the European Court of Justice in
Protecting Individual Rights in the Context of Free Movement of Persons and Services,’’
in Eric Stein and Terrence Sandalow, eds., Courts and Free Markets, vol. 2 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982), pp. 363–427.
Henry Schermers, ‘‘The Role of the European Court of Justice in the Free Movement of
Goods,’’ in Eric Stein and Terrence Sandalow, eds., Courts and Free Markets, vol. 1,
pp. 222–71.
See Haas, ‘‘International Integration,’’ p. 366; and Haas, The Uniting of Europe, p. 12.
Weiler, ‘‘The Transformation of Europe,’’ p. 2425.

478

International Law and International Relations

As long as those actors to which the Court’s decisions are directed –
member state governments, national courts, and individuals – accept
one decision as a statement of the existing law and proceed to make
arguments in the next case from that benchmark, they are shifting their
expectations. This is precisely the process that court watchers, even
potentially skeptical ones, have identified. Hjalte Rasmussen demonstrates that even governments overtly hostile to the Court’s authority do not
seek to ask the Court to overturn a previous ruling but rather accept
that ruling as a statement of the law and use it as a point of departure
for making arguments in subsequent cases. After reviewing an extensive
sample of briefs submitted to the Court by member governments,
Rasmussen was unable to find even one instance in which a member state
suggested that a prior precedent be overruled.77
This finding is particularly striking given that states do often strongly
object to a proposed interpretation or application of a particular legislative
term in its briefs and arguments prior to a particular decision.78 ***
Upgrading common interests
For the neofunctionalists, upgrading common interests referred to a
‘‘swapping mechanism’’ dependent on the services of an ‘‘institutionalized
autonomous mediator.’’ The Court is less a mediator than an arbiter and
has no means per se of ‘‘swapping’’ concessions. What it does do, however,
is continually to justify its decisions in light of the common interests of the
members as enshrined in both specific and general objectives of the original
Rome treaty. The modus operandi here is the ‘‘teleological method of
interpretation,’’ by which the court has been able to rationalize everything
from direct effect to the preemption of member state negotiating power in
external affairs in every case in which the treaty grants internal competence
to community authorities.79 All are reasoned not on the basis of specific
provisions in the treaty or community secondary legislation but on the
accomplishment of the most elementary community goals set forth in the
Preamble to the treaty.
According to Judge Pescatore, the concepts employed in the teleological
method include ‘‘concepts such as the customs union, equality of
77
78

79

Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice, pp. 275–81.
As is now widely recognized, Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands all filed briefs
strongly objecting to the notion of direct effect in Van Gend & Loos. None subsequently
suggested revisiting that decision.
Case 22/70, Commission of the European Communities v. Council of the European
Communities, ECR, 1971, p. 363.

Europe Before the Court

479

treatment and non-discrimination, freedom of movement, mutual assistance and solidarity, economic interpenetration and finally economic and
legal unity as the supreme objective.’’80 He goes on to cite two examples
from early cases concerning the free movement of goods and the customs
union. He points out that ‘‘formulas’’ such as describing the customs union
as one of the ‘‘foundations of the Community,’’ the role of which is
‘‘essential for the implementation of the Community project . . . have
been repeated and developed in very varied circumstances since this first
judgment.’’81
Rhetorically, these formulas constantly shift the analysis to a more
general level on which it is possible to assert common interests – the same
common interests that led member states into the community process in
the first place. French sheepfarmers might fight to the death with British
sheepfarmers, but the majority of the population in both nations have
a common interest in ‘‘the free movement of goods.’’ ‘‘Upgrading the
common interest,’’ in judicial parlance, is a process of reasserting longterm interest, at least as nominally perceived at the founding and enshrined
in sonorous phrases, over short-term interest. In the process, of course, to
the extent it succeeds in using this method to strengthen and enhance
community authority, the Court does certainly also succeed in upgrading
its own powers.
Context: the (apparent) separation of law and politics
The effectiveness of law in the integration process – as Haas predicted for
economics – depends on the perception that it is a domain distinct and
apart from politics. Shapiro has argued, for instance, that the Court,
aided and abetted by its commentators, has derived enormous advantage
from denying the existence of policy discretion and instead hewing to
the fiction, bolstered by the style and retroactivity of its judgments. An
absolute division between law and politics, as between economics and
politics, is ultimately impossible. Nevertheless, just as Haas stressed that
overt political concerns are less directly engaged in economic integration,
requiring some time for specific economic decisions to acquire political
significance, so, too, can legal decision making function in a relative
political vacuum. Although the political impact of judicial decisions will

80
81

Pescatore, The Law of Integration, p. 88.
Ibid., p. 89.

480

International Law and International Relations

ultimately be felt, they will be more acceptable initially due to their
independent nonpolitical justification.
The importance of undertaking integration in a nominally nonpolitical
sphere is confirmed by the underlying issues and interests at stake in the
nascent debate about judicial activism in the community. As periodic
struggles over the proper balance between judicial activism and judicial
restraint in the United States have demonstrated, assertions about the
preservation of the legitimacy and authority necessary to uphold the rule of
law generally have a particular substantive vision of the law in mind.82 In
the community context, the response to Rasmussen’s charge of judicial
activism reveals that the substantive stakes concern the prospects for the
Court’s self-professed task, integration. In heeding widespread advice to
maintain a careful balance between applying community law and
articulating and defending community ideals, the Court is really preserving its ability to camouflage controversial political decisions in
‘‘technical’’ legal garb.
Maintaining the Fiction
The European legal community appears to understand the importance of
preserving the Court’s image as a nonpolitical institution all too well. The
dominant theme in scholarship on the Court in the 1970s and 1980s was
reassurance that the Court was carrying out its delicate balancing act with
considerable success.83 Rasmussen describes a widespread refusal among
community lawyers and legal academics to criticize the Court on paper.
The consensus seems to be that overt recognition of the Court’s political
agenda beyond the bounds of what ‘‘the law’’ might fairly be said to
permit will damage the Court’s effectiveness.84 Commenting on the same
phenomenon, Shapiro has observed that the European legal community
82

83

84

See, for example, Martin Shapiro, ‘‘The Constitution and Economic Rights,’’ in M. Judd
Harmon, ed., Essays on the Constitution of the United States (Port Washington, N.Y.:
Kennikat Press, 1978), pp. 74–98.
See F. Dumon, ‘‘La jurisprudence de la Cour de Justice. Examen critique des methodes
d’interpretation’’ (The jurisprudence of the ECJ. Critical study of methods of interpretation) (Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities,
1976), pp. 51–53; A.W. Green, Political Integration by Jurisprudence (Leiden: Sijthoff,
1969), pp. 26–33 and 498; Clarence Mann, The Function of Judicial Decision in
European Economic Integration (The Hague: Martinus Nihjoff, 1972), pp. 508–15;
Scheingold, The Rule of Law in European Integration, pp. 263–85; and Stein, ‘‘Lawyers,
Judges, and the Making of a Transnational Constitution,’’ passim.
For a discussion of ‘‘the oral tradition’’ of criticism that European scholars refuse publicly
to acknowledge, see Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice,
pp. 147–48 and 152–54.

Europe Before the Court

481

understands its collective writings on the Court as a political act designed
to bolster the Court. By denying the existence of judicial activism and
thus removing a major potential locus of opposition to the Court, they
promote an institution whose pro-community values accord with their
own internalized values.85
The Court itself has cooperated in burnishing this nonpolitical image.
Pescatore set the tone in 1974, contending that the first reason for the
‘‘relative success of Community case law’’ is ‘‘the wide definition of the
task of the Court as custodian of law.’’86 And certainly the Court has
carefully crafted its opinions to present the results in terms of the
inexorable logic of the law. To cite a classic example, in the Van Gend &
Loos decision, in which the Court single-handedly transformed the Treaty
of Rome from an essentially nonenforceable international treaty to a
domestic charter with direct and enforceable effects, it cast its analysis in
the following framework: ‘‘To ascertain whether the provisions of an
international treaty extend so far in their effects it is necessary to consider
the spirit, the general scheme, and the wording of those provisions.’’87
Judge Mancini recently has continued this tradition in his description
of the Court’s success in winning over national judges. Referring to the
ECJ’s ‘‘courteously didactic’’ method, Mancini ultimately attributes the
rise of the Article 177 procedure to the ‘‘cleverness’’ of his colleagues not
in devising political strategies but in fashioning the law in such a way that
its autonomous power and ineluctable logic would be clear to the
benighted national judges. He seems astonishingly candid, observing,
with an insider’s wink: ‘‘The national judge is thus led hand in hand as
far as the door; crossing the threshold is his job, but now a job no harder
than child’s play.’’88 In fact, however, his ‘‘revelations’’ amount to a story
about the power of law, thus continuing the Court’s proud tradition of
insisting on the legal-political divide.
Mancini also has joined with other judges, most notably Ulrich
Everling, in public penance to reassure concerned onlookers that the
Court was very aware of the need for prudence. By the early 1980s,
responding to simmering criticism, Judge Everling published several
articles announcing that much of the foundational work in establishing

85

86
87
88

Martin Shapiro, ‘‘Comparative Law and Comparative Politics,’’ Southern California Law
Review 53 (January 1980), p. 542.
Pescatore, The Law of Integration, p. 89.
Van Gend & Loos.
Mancini, ‘‘The Making of a Constitution,’’ p. 606.

482

International Law and International Relations

the Treaty of Rome as a community constitution was done and that
the Court could now afford to take a lower political profile. In 1989
Judge Mancini applauded the work of the Court to date but noted that
the political relaunching of the community embodied in the SEA and
the progress of the 1992 initiative toward a genuine common market
would now permit the Court essentially to confine its activities to the
more purely legal sphere.89
Transforming the political into the legal
Court watchers have long understood that the ECJ uses the EC Commission as a political bellwether. In any given case, the ECJ looks to the
commission’s position as an indicator of political acceptability to the
member states of a particular result or a line of reasoning.90 From
the Court’s own perspective, however, the chief advantage of following
the commission is the ‘‘advantage of objectivity,’’ resulting from the
commission’s supranational perspective.91 In neofunctionalist terms, the
Court’s reliance on what Pescatore characterizes as ‘‘well-founded information and balanced legal evaluations,’’ as ‘‘source material for the
Court’s decisions’’ allows it to cast itself as nonpolitical by contrasting
the neutrality and objectivity of its decision-making processes with the
partisan political agendas of the parties before it.
Relatively less attention has been paid to the role of the commission in
depoliticizing potentially inflammatory disputes among the member
states. Judge Pierre Pescatore credits the procedure set forth in Article
169 (whereby the commission initiates an action against a member state
for a declaration of default on a community legal obligation) with
defusing the potential fireworks of an Article 170 proceeding, in which
one state would bring such a charge directly against another.92 By
allowing default proceedings to be initiated by ‘‘an institution representative of the whole, and hence objective both by its status and by its
task,’’ this device ‘‘permits the Member States more easily to accept this
process of control over their Community behavior and the censure which
may arise for them from the judgments of the Court.’’93 Against this
89
90

91
92
93

Ibid., pp. 612–14.
The classic study documenting this proposition is Eric Stein, ‘‘Lawyers, Judges, and the
Making of a Transnational Constitution,’’ p. 25. Out of ten landmark cases, Stein found
only two in which the Court had diverged from the Commission.
Pescatore, The Law of Integration, p. 80.
Ibid., pp. 80–82.
Ibid., p. 82.

Europe Before the Court

483

backdrop, it is of signal importance that the Court itself actively and
successfully encouraged the increased use of the Article 169 procedure.94
This perspective reveals yet another dimension of the Court’s encouragement of the Article 177 procedure. The increased use of Article 177
shifted the vanguard of community law enforcement (and creation) to
cases involving primarily private parties. It thus further removed the
Court from the overtly political sphere of direct conflicts between
member states, or even between the commission and member states.
The political implications of private legal disputes, while potentially very
important, often require a lawyer’s eye to discern. Following Haas’s
description of economic integration, Article 177 cases offer a paradigm
for the ‘‘indirect’’ penetration of the political by way of the legal.
Law as a mask
The above discussion of context reveals that the neofunctionalist domain
is a domain theoretically governed by a distinct set of nonpolitical objectives, such as ‘‘the rule of law’’ or ‘‘economic growth and efficiency,’’ and
by a distinctive methodology and logic. These characteristics operate
to define a purportedly ‘‘neutral’’ zone in which it is possible to reach
outcomes that would be impossible to achieve in the political arena.
Neofunctionalists also insisted, however, that this neutral zone would not
be completely divorced from politics. On the contrary, ‘‘economic’’ – or,
in our case, ‘‘legal’’ – decisions inevitably would acquire political significance. This gradual interpenetration was the mechanism by which economic integration might ultimately lead to political integration.
The key to understanding this process is that even an economic decision
that has acquired political significance is not the same as a ‘‘purely’’
political decision and cannot be attacked as such. It retains an independent
‘‘nonpolitical’’ rationale, which must be met by a counterargument on its
own terms. Within this domain, then, contending political interests must
do battle by proxy. The chances of victory are affected by the strength of
that proxy measured by independent nonpolitical criteria.
From this perspective, law functions both as mask and shield. It hides
and protects the promotion of one particular set of political objectives
against contending objectives in the purely political sphere. In specifying
this dual relationship between law and politics, we also uncover a striking
paradox. Law can only perform this dual political function to the extent
it is accepted as law. A ‘‘legal’’ decision that is transparently ‘‘political,’’ in
94

See Rasmussen, On Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice, pp. 238–40.

484

International Law and International Relations

the sense that it departs too far from the principles and methods of the
law, will invite direct political attack. It will thus fail both as mask and
shield. Conversely, a court seeking to advance its own political agenda
must accept the independent constraints of legal reasoning, even when
such constraints require it to reach a result that is far narrower than the
one it might deem politically optimal.
In short, a court’s political legitimacy, and hence its ability to advance its
own political agenda, rests on its legal legitimacy. This premise is hardly
news to domestic lawyers. It has informed an entire school of thought
about the U.S. Supreme Court.95 It also accords with the perception of
ECJ judges of how to enhance their own effectiveness, as witnessed not
only by their insistence on their strict adherence to the goals of the Treaty
of Rome but also by their vehement reaction to charges of activism.
Mancini again: ‘‘If what makes a judge ‘good’ is his awareness of the
constraints on judicial decision-making and the knowledge that rulings
must be convincing in order to evoke obedience, the Luxembourg judges
of the 1960s and 1970s were obviously very good.’’96
What is new about the neofunctionalist approach is that it demonstrates
the ways in which the preservation of judicial legitimacy shields an entire
domain of integrationist processes, hence permitting the accretion of
power and the pursuit of individual interests by specified actors within
a dynamic of expansion. Moreover, the effectiveness of ‘‘law as a mask’’
extends well beyond the ECJ’s efforts to construct a community legal
system. To the extent that judges of the European Court do in fact remain
within the plausible boundaries of existing law, they achieve a similar
level of effectiveness in the broader spheres of economic, social, and
political integration.

[conclusion]
* * *
In his most recent article, Weiler depicts much of the ‘‘systemic evolution of
Europe’’ as the result of the self-created and internally sustained power of
law. Shapiro made a similar point in the article in which he first threw down
the gauntlet to community legal scholars to take account of the larger
95

96

The most notable proponents of this approach to American judicial politics were Justice
Felix Frankfurter and his intellectual prote´ge´ Alexander Bickel. See Alexander Bickel,
The Supreme Court and the Idea of Progress (New York: Harper and Row, 1970).
Mancini, ‘‘The Making of a Constitution for Europe,’’ p. 605, emphasis original.

Europe Before the Court

485

political context in which the Court was acting. He concluded that the
legalist analysis might ultimately be the more ‘‘politically sophisticated
one’’ on the ground that ‘‘legal realities are realities too.’’97 Rasmussen
would agree, although he fears that legal realities are likely to be overborne by political realities as a result of a loss of judicial legitimacy. This
position might be described as the ‘‘sophisticated legalist’’ position – one
that recognizes the existence of countervailing political forces but that
nevertheless accords a role for the autonomous power of law.98
The neofunctionalist approach integrates that insight with a carefully
specified theory of the individual incentives and choices facing the servants
of law and a description of the processes whereby they advance their own
agenda within a sheltered domain. Thus, although we agree with Weiler’s
conclusion, we go far beyond his general claim that the power of law
within the community emanates from the ‘‘deep-seated legitimacy that
derives from the mythical neutrality and religious-like authority with
which we invest our supreme courts.’’99 The power flows from a network
of strongly motivated individuals acting above and below the state. To
enhance and preserve that power, they must preserve and earn anew the
presumed legitimacy of law by remaining roughly faithful to its canons.
In conclusion, neofunctionalism offers a genuine political theory of an
important dimension of European integration. It is a theory that should be
equally comprehensible and plausible to lawyers and political scientists,
even if European judges and legal scholars resist it for reasons the theory
itself explains. Previously, those who would argue for the force of the law
had to forsake ‘‘political’’ explanations, or at least explanations satisfactory to political scientists. Conversely, most of those seeking to construct
a social scientific account of the role of the Court typically have eschewed
‘‘fuzzy’’ arguments based on the power of law. We advance a theory of the
interaction of law and politics that draws on both disciplines, explaining
the role of law in European integration as a product of rational motivation
and choice. Lawyers seeking to offer causal explanations, as well as
political scientists trying to explain legal phenomena, should be equally
satisfied.
97
98

99

Shapiro, ‘‘Comparative Law and Comparative Politics,’’ pp. 540–42.
It should be noted here that Volcansek has integrated similar arguments into a more
comprehensive political theory about the impact of ECJ judgments on national courts,
arguing for the importance of ‘‘legitimacy and efficacy’’ as one of four factors determining
the nature of that impact. See Volcansek, Judicial Politics in Europe, pp. 267–70.
Weiler, ‘‘The Transformation of Europe,’’ p. 2428.

19
The European Court of Justice, National Governments,
and Legal Integration in the European Union
Geoffrey Garrett, R. Daniel Kelemen, and Heiner Schulz

* * *
The growth of European law has been central to the broader process of
European integration. The accretion of power by the European Court
of Justice (ECJ) is arguably the clearest manifestation of the transfer
of sovereignty from nation-states to a supranational institution *** in
modern international politics ***. The ECJ is more similar to the U.S.
Supreme Court than to the International Court of Justice or the dispute
panels of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the
World Trade Organization (WTO). The Court interprets European Union
(EU) treaties as if they represent a de facto constitution for Europe
and exercises judicial review over laws and practices within member
states. The ECJ is thus in the business of declaring extant national laws and
the behavior of national governments ‘‘EU-unconstitutional.’’ Even more
significantly from the standpoint of conventional international relations,
member governments often abide by such decisions.
There are two perspectives on the evolution and operation of Europe’s
remarkable legal system. The legal autonomy approach argues that the ECJ
has been able to push forward its European integration agenda against

We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of Carsten Albers, Karen Alter, Lisa
Conant, Christian Joerges, John Odell, Susanne Schmidt, participants of GAAC Young
Scholars’ Institute, three anonymous reviewers, and the editors of International Organization. We would particularly like to thank Anne-Marie Slaughter for her detailed critique of
an earlier version of this paper. Garrett and Schultz acknowledge the financial support,
respectively, of the Reginald Jones Center of the Wharton School and the Gottlieb Daimlerand Karl Benz-Foundation.

486

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

487

the interests of some member states.1 According to this view, national
governments paid insufficient attention to the Court’s behavior during
the 1960s and 1970s when the Court developed a powerful set of legal
doctrines and co-opted the support of domestic courts for them. By
the time member governments finally realized that the ECJ was a powerful actor in the 1980s, reining in the Court’s power had become very
difficult.
In contrast the political power approach argues [that governments
from EU member states] have not been *** victims of European legal
integration ***.2 From this perspective the member governments have
given the ECJ autonomy to increase the effectiveness of the incomplete
contracts the governments have signed with each other (that is, the EU
treaty base). In turn the judges of the ECJ realize that their power is
ultimately contingent on the acquiescence of member states and hence are
reticent to make decisions of which governments disapprove.
Notwithstanding rhetorical characterizations of the ECJ either as
‘‘master’’ or as ‘‘servant,’’ proponents of each view agree on one common
assumption: the ECJ is a strategic actor that is sensitive to the preferences
of EU member governments. ***
[We follow suit] by presenting a game theoretic analysis of the strategic
environment affecting interactions between the Court and national governments in the EU. This yields three empirically testable hypotheses. ***
First, the greater the clarity of ECJ case law precedent, the lesser the
likelihood that the Court will tailor its decisions to the anticipated reactions of member governments. Second, the greater the domestic costs of an
ECJ ruling to a litigant member government, the lesser the likelihood that
the government will abide by an ECJ decision that adversely affects its
interests (and hence, *** the lesser the likelihood that the Court will make
such ‘‘adverse’’ decisions).
Our third hypothesis brings in the reactions of governments other
than the litigant in a particular case. Governments that are subject to
adverse decisions can engage in unilateral noncompliance. However,
they can also press for the passage of new *** EU legislation *** or
even revision of the EU treaty base ***. Noncompliance may reduce the
costs of an adverse decision, but it is less likely to constrain the future

1

2

See *** Burley and Mattli 1993; *** Slaughter, Stone, and Weiler 1997; Stein 1981; and
Weiler 1991.
See Cooter and Drexl 1994; Garrett 1992; Garrett 1995a; and Garrett and Weingast
1993.

488

International Law and International Relations

behavior of the ECJ than is secondary legislation. Treaty revisions are
clearly even more constraining on the Court. But legislation and treaty
revisions demand more coordination on the part of member governments.
[We thus hypothesize] that the greater the activism of the ECJ and the
larger the number of member governments adversely affected by it, the
greater the likelihood that responses by litigant governments will move
from individual noncompliance to coordinated retaliation. Conversely, of
course, the specter of coordinated responses will make the ECJ more
reticent to make adverse decisions.3
It should be clear from these hypotheses that the ECJ may face
conflicting incentives. [In order to maintain its legitimacy, the Court will
seek to avoid making decisions that it anticipates governments will defy.]
In order to maintain its status as an independent arbiter, however, the
Court must *** minimize the appearance of succumbing to political
pressures from interested parties. Avoiding member government defiance
may call for one decision; maintaining legal consistency may demand a
very different one. In making its rulings, the ECJ must weigh the consequences of both courses of action. [It] is in those cases where the Court
is cross-pressured that conflict with governments is likely to break out.
*** Until now the protagonists in the legal politics debate have sought
to support their own arguments with selective citation of illustrative cases.
We strive to do better. ***
* * *
Our case selection strategy seeks to capture the analytic benefits of
focusing on adverse ECJ decisions that prove ex post to be controversial
(that is, eliciting government responses), but to do so while minimizing
the costs of [this inherent] selection bias. We have chosen to analyze broad
streams of controversial ECJ case law where the Court repeatedly confronts similar legal principles but in different contexts. This allows us to
test *** our three hypotheses by holding the legal principles constant ***.
We focus on three lines of cases ***. The first involves bans on
agricultural imports, where ECJ decisions stood on the front line in the
battle between the conflicting trade liberalization and agricultural protection agendas of the EU. The second set of cases involves the application
of principles of equal treatment of the sexes to occupational pensions – one
of the most controversial areas of ECJ activism in recent years because of
3

These two statements may seem mutually inconsistent, but they are not in the context of
iterated games and incomplete information.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

489

its enormous financial implications. Finally, we analyze Court decisions
pertaining to state liability for the violation of EU law. These last cases
arguably represent the Court’s most important constitutional decisions
since the early 1970s concerning the relationship between EU law and
national sovereignty.
Empirical analysis of these lines of cases lends broad-based support
to each of our three hypotheses. ***
The article is divided into three sections. In the first section we present
our game theoretic understanding of the strategic interactions between the
ECJ and member governments. In the second section we outline our three
hypotheses regarding the impact of ECJ precedent, domestic conditions,
and EU coalitions on the behavior of litigant governments and the Court.
In the third section we examine the empirical utility of our arguments
against lines of cases concerning trade liberalization, equal treatment of
the sexes, and state liability.

the legal politics game in the european union
Asserting that ECJ decision making is strategic is no longer controversial ***.4 The Court’s preferences regarding how EU law should be interpreted often differ from those of member state governments ***.
*** We analyze the ECJ–litigant government interaction as a repeated
noncooperative *** game *** in which actors discount the future at a
reasonable rate (see Figure 19.1). * [The] ECJ moves first by ruling on the
legality of an existing national law or practice with respect to European
law (embodied in EU treaties, directives, regulations, and decisions made
pursuant to the treaties or previous Court decisions).5 If the Court decides
that the national law or practice is consistent with EU law, the status quo
is not disturbed (‘‘conciliation’’ between the ECJ and the relevant
government results in payoffs of Cc and Gc, respectively).6
If, however, the ECJ rules against an extant national law or practice,
the adversely affected member government must choose whether to abide
by the ruling. Acceptance entails changing national practices or laws to
conform with the decision or compensating the party that has suffered
4
5

6

See Burley and Mattli 1993; Mattli & Slaughter 1995; and Weiler 1991.
In practice, of course, numerous steps take place prior to the Court’s decision (including
previous plays of the government–ECJ game). Perhaps the most important of these that
we do not analyze is the referral of cases to the ECJ by national courts – the preliminary
judgments procedure of Article 177 of the Treaty of Rome. ***
For definition of terms, see Figure 19.1.

ECJ

a

(Cc, Gc)a

Litigant
government
Not accept decision
• Unilateral evasion
• Press for secondary
legislation
• Press for treaty
revision

Accept decision

(Ca, Ga)

Figure 19.1. The legal politics game

Items in parentheses are payoffs:
C = ECJ
G = Member government involved in case
a = Affected government acquiesces in adverse decision
c = ECJ conciliates with government
d = Adversely affected government unilaterally defies ECJ
r = Member governments collectively restrain ECJ

Not adverse
decision

Adverse
decision

Other EU
member
governments
Not support

Support

(Cd, Gd)

(Cr, Gr)

490

International Law and International Relations

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

491

losses as a result of them (payoffs from such ‘‘acquiescence’’ are Ca, Ga).
If the government chooses not to abide by the decision, it has three ways
to respond. The government may engage in overt or concealed evasion
of the decision, it may press for new EU legislation to overturn the decision, or it may call for changes in the constitutional foundations of the
Court by proposing revisions to the EU treaty base.
The final part of the stage game concerns the reactions of the remaining
EU member governments to the decision by one of its members not to
accept an ECJ decision. If the other governments support their colleague
by ‘‘restraining’’ the ECJ (through new legislation or treaty revisions),
the resulting payoffs to the Court and the adversely affected government
are Cr and Gr . If the other governments do not support nonacceptance,
the adversely affected member government will have to engage in isolated
‘‘defiance’’ (Cd, Gd).
This is the end of the stage game, but the process continues with the
next Court decision. The Court’s strategic choice is the same: it must
decide whether to interpret EU law in a way that adversely affects a member government. In the second round, however, the Court takes into account the information it gained in the previous play of the game ***. The
government that plays in the second iteration of the game may be the same
as in the first round, or it may be different. After the second decision and
reaction by the litigant government and by other EU members, the actors
update their information, and the stage game is played again. The indefinite
repetition of this process determines the evolution of the EU legal system.
In the stage game, the basic preference ordering of the ECJ (assuming
that prima facie legal grounds justify an adverse decision) can be described
by the following inequality:
Ca . Cd . Cc . Cr

ð1Þ

The ECJ has a clear institutional interest in extending the scope of
Community law and its authority to interpret it. * The best way for the
Court to further this agenda is through the gradual extension of case law
(that is, the replacement of national laws by ECJ decisions as the law
of the land ***). [One] can think of the conciliation outcome (for which
the Court’s payoff is Cc) as maintaining the status quo: the ECJ does not
expand the scope of its case law, but its authority is not questioned by
government defiance.7 From the Court’s perspective, situations in which
7

It is important to remember here that the ability of the ECJ to engage in judicial review of
legislation is not guaranteed by the founding treaties of the EU. ***

492

International Law and International Relations

it makes adverse decisions that the relevant government accepts are
clearly preferable to the status quo (Ca > Cc). However, if an adverse ECJ
decision results in other EU governments rallying around in support
of the litigant government to restrain the Court, *** this would be a
worse outcome for the ECJ than maintaining the status quo. *** As a
result, Cc . Cr.
The Court’s preferences are less clear-cut regarding the situation in
which an adverse ruling is not followed by the litigant government,
but that government’s position is not supported by its colleagues (Cd).
The Court would clearly prefer that the litigant government accept its
adverse decision (that is, Ca . Cd); the worst outcome for the ECJ
would be where a government’s nonacceptance of an adverse decision
is supported by the other EU governments (Cd > Cr). But how should the
Court compare isolated defiance with maintenance of the status quo?
We believe that, in general, Cd . Cc. Our reasoning is that at least one
EU member state (tacitly) approves of the Court’s decision (in cases
where unanimity is required to restrain the Court), or a substantial minority (under qualified majority voting). Even though having even a
single government flout its authority is a matter of concern for the
ECJ, this would likely be outweighed by the implicit support of the
decision by other member governments. Nonetheless, it should be
pointed out that our analysis does not depend on Cd . Cc (see the next
section). ***
We now consider the basic preference order of the litigant member
government in the stage game, which we assume to be generally expressed
by the following inequality:
Gc . Gr . Ga . Gd

ð2Þ

[We] assume the EU member governments support a powerful system
of EU law in which the ECJ faithfully implements the governments’
intentions as laid out in the EU treaty base. * Governments understand that
having a well-defined rule of law fosters mutually beneficial economic
exchange. But it is very difficult *** to write complete contracts (in the
case of the EU, treaties). Delegating authority to the ECJ is thus essential to
the efficient functioning of the rule of law in Europe ***. Any time
a member government rejects an ECJ decision, this not only undermines
the legitimacy of the EU legal system, but also threatens to earn for the
government a reputation as an actor that does not play by the rules. By
contrast, when member states comply with an adverse ruling, they
strengthen the EU legal [system.] The more a member government benefits

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

493

from the economic exchanges made possible by the rule of law in Europe,
the greater its respect for ECJ decisions.
At the same time, adverse decisions will always be costly to governments ***. As a result, the status quo is the best outcome for the litigant
government (Gc). Once the Court makes an adverse decision, however,
the litigant government would most prefer the situation in which it does
not accept the decision *** and where it is supported by the other EU
member governments through new legislation or a treaty revision that
restrains the ECJ (that is, Gr . Ga). Finally, we assume that the worst
outcome for a litigant government is isolated defiance of an adverse ECJ
decision (Cd). *** As was the case with the Court’s preference order,
however, our analysis would be unaffected if we were to assume that
governments might prefer isolated defiance to acceptance (that is, Gd .
Ga) – for example, by virtue of placing a very heavy weight on
sovereignty ***.
We have now described the preference orders of the ECJ and litigant
governments in the legal politics stage game. The equilibrium outcome
in the stage game depends on the behavior of the EU member governments that are not party to the case at hand. If they support the litigant
government, *** the ECJ would not make an adverse decision, since the
litigant government would not abide by the ruling ***. If, on the other
hand, the other governments decide not to act, the ECJ would rule against
the litigant government, which in turn would accept the decision ***.
Moreover, changes in the legislative rules of the EU will also affect
the behavior of the ECJ and litigant governments. [The] use of qualified
majority voting makes collective resistance easier and more likely. This
suggests that court activism should have decreased since the ratification
of the Single European Act in 1987. ***
* * *

ecj precedent, domestic politics, and eu coalitions
If the theoretical framework presented in the preceding section is to
provide us with analytic leverage over the actual jurisprudence of the ECJ,
it must generate comparative statics results that relate differences in the
specific circumstances of a case to variations in outcomes (both case law
and government reactions to decisions). We begin this task by discussing
the factors that will influence the preferences of the ECJ and member
governments as the dynamics of the legal politics game unfold over time
with respect to lines of case law.

494

International Law and International Relations
The ECJ

[Legal] precedent greatly concerns the ECJ. * All independent judiciaries
are expected to make decisions based on legal principles. Although the
foundations for such principles are often enshrined in constitutions (or
treaties in the case of the EU), they are invariably modified in case law
where courts assert powers or interpretations that are not transparent in
such foundational documents. If a court’s jurisprudence were to change
frequently from case to case ***, however, the court would surely lose
legitimacy. This is because a court’s claim to power ultimately rests on its
image as an impartial advocate for ‘‘the law.’’ ***
This argument suggests that from the standpoint of the ECJ, a tension
will often exist between the desire not to make judgments that adversely
affect the interests of member governments and the importance of legal
consistency. Avoiding member government defiance may call for one
verdict; following precedent may dictate another. Can we put a metric
on the costs of inconsistency for the ECJ? The simple answer is that these
costs are a function of the clarity of existing precedent. Where there are
more conflicting cases on the books or where the treaties of the EU are
more ambiguous on a given point of law (for example, Articles 30 and 36
concerning ‘‘free movement’’), the costs of inconsistency will be lower. *
More generally:
H1: The greater the clarity of EU treaties, case precedent, and legal norms in
support of an adverse judgment, the greater the likelihood that the ECJ will
rule against a litigant government.

This hypothesis suggests that the Court’s ceteris paribus preference
ordering outlined in inequality (1) should be modified to take into account the clarity of legal precedent. *** Consider a scenario in which
case law precedent is transparent and dictates that the ECJ should take
an adverse decision against a member government. * The effects of this
change on the first part of the game tree in Figure 19.1 are clear. Unambiguous precedent increases the attractiveness to the ECJ of taking an
adverse decision that the litigant government subsequently accepts (that
is, the gap between Ca and Cc would increase). *** Clear precedent
should also increase the utility the Court would derive from the isolated
defiance outcome relative to the situation in which the litigant government’s defiance is supported by other ECJ governments (thus, the gap
between Cd and Cr would increase).
But what if the Court prefers an outcome in which its (precedentdriven) decision ultimately leads the member governments collectively

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

495

to restrain the ECJ to the scenario in which the Court does not make an
adverse decision in the first place and hence does not provoke an intergovernmental reaction (that is, if Cr . Cc)? This change in the Court’s
preferences would have a dramatic impact on the legal politics game. ***
Irrespective of how the litigant government and its other EU colleagues
behaved, the Court would still rule the extant national law or practice
illegal. In this extreme case, the litigant government would face a clear
choice between accepting the decision (Ga) and trying to enlist the
support of the other member governments to restrain the Court (Gr).
The litigant government’s preferred outcome (Gc) would no longer be
feasible. Clearly, litigant governments will always prefer Gr to Ga,
but restraint can only be achieved with the support of other member
governments (we discuss the conditions that make this more likely with
respect to H3). ***
The Litigant Government
The international preferences of national governments over foreign
policy no doubt contain both internal and external elements. For some,
government preferences are largely a function of the constellation of domestic interests,8 perhaps conditioned by the institutional structure of
national polities.9 But observers of the EU often suggest that sovereignty
concerns are preeminent for at least some member governments ***.
These two views can be integrated by arguing that governments typically
value sovereignty because they view it as a pre-requisite for winning in
domestic politics.10 ***
With respect to domestic factors, the short-termism inherent in
democratic politics means that distributive politics will generally tend to
dominate the incentives to increase aggregate prosperity. ECJ decisions
often threaten to impose heavy costs on segments of the economy – for
example, by overturning national laws that act as nontariff barriers
supporting specific sectors. Other Court decisions may harm the agendas
of feminist, environmental, or other interest groups. For governments,
the operative question is the importance of these groups to their reelection efforts. ***
But ECJ decisions may also have deleterious consequences for national governments in a more direct sense – for example, by imposing
8
9
10

See Frieden 1991; and Frieden and Rogowski 1996.
Garrett and Lange 1995.
Powell 1991.

496

International Law and International Relations

new responsibilities on the state or by reducing tax receipts. Finally,
the potential for governments to be held liable for the violation of EU
law increases the threat that the Court could impose sanctions itself –
for example, through orders to compensate citizens and firms that
have suffered due to the violation. Our intent here is not to develop a
detailed algorithm for weighting these various factors. * Rather, we only
wish to propose the following hypothesis:
H2: The greater the domestic costs of an ECJ ruling to a litigant government, the
lesser the likelihood that the government will abide by an adverse ECJ decision.

*** The simplest consequence of H2 is that the gap between Gc and all
other outcomes would increase with the greater costs to the government
of an adverse decision. That is, the desirability to the litigant government
of the Court’s not taking an adverse decision would rise. H2 also implies
that the payoff gap between collective restraint of the ECJ (Gr) and
accepting adverse decision (Ga) would increase ***.
The pivotal issue, however, concerns how the litigant government’s
domestic circumstances would affect its utility comparison between Ga
and defying the ECJ in isolation (Gd). If the government is sufficiently
concerned about the domestic costs of an adverse decision, then Gd . Ga.
As was the case for the Court’s decisional calculus, this would give the
litigant government a dominant strategy in cases where the ECJ makes
an adverse decision. The government would not accept the decision,
irrespective of whether it thought other member governments would
support its defiance. ***
Other Member Governments
* * *
The most decisive way that member governments can restrict ECJ
activism without violating the basic tenets of the EU legal system is to
revise EU treaties. Although this has occasionally been done (see our
discussions of the Barber protocol in the next section), the threshold
to such constitutional revision is very high – unanimity among the EU
member governments and subsequent ratification by national parliaments, national referendums, or both.
An easier path for restraining legal activism is the passage of new
EU legislation to counteract the effects of ECJ decisions. *** [Since] the
mid-1980s much legislation requires only the support of a qualified
majority in the Council, significantly reducing the obstacles to passage. *

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

497

Clearly, however, an inverse relationship exists between the ECJrestraining power of these strategies and their ease of implementation.
Secondary legislation is relatively easy to pass, but it cannot be guaranteed to rein in the Court’s activism in a given area. The ECJ could simply
respond by arguing that its interpretation is consistent with the EU
treaty base, and that the new legislation is not. Treaty revision is much
harder to achieve, but it is the ultimate constraint on the Court (which
views itself as the protector of the treaties).
When should we expect the EU governments collectively to seek
to restrain ECJ activism? Two conditions stand out. First, the greater the
importance of a particular case to more member governments, the greater
the likelihood that they will collectively support a litigant government
seeking to defy an adverse judgment. Second, the greater the number of
cases within a similar branch of the law that the Court adversely decides,
the greater the likelihood of a collective response to constrain the ECJ. ***
Thus our third hypothesis is:
H3: The greater the potential costs of a case, the larger the number of governments potentially affected by it, and the larger the number of adverse decisions the ECJ makes in similar areas of the law, the greater the likelihood that
the EU member governments will respond collectively to restrain EU activism.

The effects of variations in EU-wide support for litigant governments
on the legal politics game are straightforward. The greater the probability
of a collective restraint response to adverse ECJ decisions, the lesser the
weight that the Court and the litigant government should attach to the
pair of payoffs Cd, Gd. Indeed, if both actors were to attach zero probability to this outcome, the strategic dynamics of the legal politics game
would change considerably. The litigant government would know that
its defiance would be supported by its EU colleagues. It would thus not
accept any adverse decision by the ECJ because it could always do better
by pressing for new secondary legislation or treaty revisions (because
Gr . Ga). In turn the ECJ would not make an adverse decision in the
first place, because conciliating the litigant government is better for it
than inciting a collective act of restraint (Cc . Cr).

a strategic history of ecj case law
The preceding two sections have developed a simple framework for
analyzing EU legal politics and a set of hypotheses about the dynamics
of ECJ–litigant government interactions. This section assesses how well
our theory and hypotheses fit the actual history of ECJ jurisprudence,

498

International Law and International Relations

using three lines of cases: nontariff barriers to agricultural trade, equal
treatment of the sexes, and state liability for the violation of EU law.
Import Bans on Agricultural Products
The 1958 Treaty of Rome demanded as part of the effort to create a
common market that extant trade quotas among member states be abolished during a transitional period ending on 31 December 1969 (Articles
8 and 32). The treaty spelled out a detailed timetable for the progressive
elimination of these quotas (Article 33). The treaty also required that the
establishment of a Common Agricultural Policy among the member states
(Article 38 (4)) accompany the development of the common market. Thus
domestic deregulation was combined with deregulation at the EU level ***.
By the end of the transition period, however, member states had not
established common policies for a few agricultural products. In the 1970s
the ECJ heard a series of cases concerning the effect of the Rome treaty on
these products. The Charmasson case involved a requested annulment of
a quota for banana imports imposed by the French government on 28
October 1969.11 Charmasson argued that the quota violated the timetable set forth in Article 33 for eliminating quantitative restrictions to
trade. The French government contended that because a national marketing organization for bananas was already in place in 1958, Article 33
did not apply. ***
The ECJ decided that the existence of a national marketing organization could preclude the application of Article 33 and made it clear that
the French quota scheme could be viewed as such a national organization. The Court added, however, that such marketing organizations could
suspend the application of Article 33 only during the transitional period.
After 31 December 1969 Article 33 would have to be applied, regardless
of whether or not the member states had established a communitywide
marketing organization.
*** The contradictions between a free-trade article (Article 33) and the
agricultural provisions (Articles 38–46) gave the ECJ leeway in interpreting the Rome treaty. The Court made a bold pro-integration interpretation by ruling that national marketing organizations could not stand in
the way of free trade after the end of the transition period. *** The
French government opposed this interpretation and, given the domestic
11

Case 48/74, Mr. Charmasson v. Minister for Economic Affaires and Finance [1983] ECR
1383.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

499

sensitivity of the banana sector, was likely to defy the ECJ (consistent with
H2). * The likelihood of immediate French defiance, however, was
somewhat tempered by the Court’s use of the classic Marbury v. Madison
technique. The ECJ decided for the French government in the case at
hand, while establishing a principle that the government opposed (Article
33 would be applied after the end of the transitional period). Nonetheless,
the French government was likely to oppose the dissolution of its banana
marketing organization.
Why did the Court make such a pro-integration ruling, knowing that
it would likely provoke French defiance? Consistent with H3, the fact
that the ECJ had little reason to expect a collective response from the
member governments was likely [very important.] Given the divisive
nature of banana politics in the EU, and because few other products had
not yet been incorporated into the Common Agricultural Policy, a treaty
revision was most unlikely. *** A more probable collective response was
that the ruling would spur the member states to create a common
marketing organization for bananas (which is what the Court wanted).
The Charmasson precedent was subsequently tested in a dispute over
potatoes. In the Potato case, the Commission challenged the United
Kingdom’s national market organization ***.12
The precedent established in Charmasson made it more likely that the
ECJ would rule against the United Kingdom in the Potato case – as
eventually transpired. ***
The next development in this line of ECJ jurisprudence was the Sheep
Meat case, in which the French government claimed that it should be
allowed to maintain its national market organization for mutton.13 ***
The French government asserted that in the period between the abolition
of its national rules and the establishment of EU rules, domestic
producers would be unfairly disadvantaged in competition with British
producers who were subsidized by their government.14 *** The French
government also declared that it would continue banning imports
regardless of the Court’s decision. * Nonetheless, the Court held that the
French sheep meat regime had to be discontinued. This decision sparked
what came to be known as the ‘‘sheep meat war.’’ France refused to
comply with the Court’s ruling, declaring that it would do nothing until
a common market organization for sheep meat was established. *
12
13
14

Case 231/78, Commission v. UK [1979] ECR 1447.
Case 232/78, Commission v. France [1979] ECR 2729.
Rasmussen 1986, 339.

500

International Law and International Relations

The domestic costs of the Sheep Meat decision led the French government to defy the ECJ (consistent with H2). Given the high cost of an
adverse decision to French farmers and given the French government’s
open unwillingness to comply with an adverse decision the Court might
have chosen not to rule against France. This was a case, however, where
H1 and H3 dominated H2. On the one hand, the ECJ knew that if
it violated its own clear and recent precedents under pressure from the
French, it would lose legitimacy as an impartial arbiter in the eyes of other
member governments. On the other hand, the Court had little reason to
believe that the member governments would act collectively to oppose its
decision. Overturning the decision would require unanimous member
government support for a treaty revision, whereas at least one member
government, the United Kingdom, was known to oppose the French
position (as it was eager to export sheep meat to France). In this case, the
cost of caving in to member government pressure apparently was higher
to the Court than the cost of isolated French defiance.
The sheep meat dispute was ultimately resolved in the manner suggested by the French government – a common market organization for
sheep meat was established at the Dublin meeting of the Council in May
1980. At the same meeting, in a clear reference to the Sheep Meat ruling,
President Vale´ry Giscard d’Estaing of France suggested that the member
states should jointly constrain the ability of the ECJ to make ‘‘illegal
decisions.’’ * Giscard suggested an institutional reform that would have
given the ‘‘big four’’ member governments an additional judge on the
Court (similar to Roosevelt’s efforts to pack the Supreme Court with New
Dealers in 1936). * Ultimately, however, no such changes were made.
In sum, this line of cases provides some support for each of our three
hypotheses. The ECJ took advantage of the conflict between a free-trade
provision (Article 33) and agricultural policy provisions (Articles 38–46)
to establish a controversial precedent [(H1).] *** The conflict came to
a head in the Sheep Meat case, and when push came to shove the French
government was not prepared to back down given the high domestic costs
of so doing (H2). The Court was willing to maintain its adversarial stance
because it did not think that a restraining collective response from the
member governments was likely (H3).
Equal Treatment of the Sexes
Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome states that men and women should
receive equal pay for equal work. Pay is defined broadly (in ironically

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

501

sexist language) as ‘‘the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and
any other consideration, whether in cash or in kind, which the worker
receives, directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment from his
employer.’’ This loose definition has prompted numerous ECJ cases
concerning the benefits that fall under the rubric of Article 119 ***,
particularly age pensions.
The first significant case was Defrenne No. 1.15 The ECJ held that
pensions paid under statutory (that is, publicly mandated) social security schemes did not constitute pay as defined in Article 119. *** In
Defrenne No. 2, the ECJ declared that Article 119 had direct effect;
individuals could rely on Article 119 in cases before national courts.16
The Court applied a retrospective limitation to its judgment so that
states would not have to answer to complaints regarding violations of
Article 119 prior to the date of the Defrenne No. 2 decision. This was
expedient since it was clear that acting otherwise might have ran some
national pension schemes into bankruptcy. * This decision left unanswered the question of whether Article 119 applied to occupational
pensions.
Finally, in Bilka the Court declared that occupational pensions
constituted pay under Article 119.17 *** The ramifications of this decision were potentially enormous and extremely costly to employers. This
seems inconsistent with H3 because the Court could have expected
a collective restraining response from the EU member governments.
Indeed, the Council made a quick, if somewhat messy, effort at damage
control. Two months after Bilka the Council passed a new directive on
occupational pensions.18 The directive gave occupational pension
schemes until 1993 to comply with the equal treatment principle but
exempted the use of sex-based actuarial assumptions and survivors’
pensions from the equal treatment doctrine altogether. The directive also
delayed the requirement to equalize pensionable ages. *
The ECJ moved next. In the Barber case the Court ruled that sex-based
differences in pensionable ages violated Article 119 and had to be
eliminated.19 This decision was at odds with the Council’s directive
regarding pensionable ages and in effect overruled it. However, the Court

15
16
17
18
19

Case 80/70, Defrenne v. Belgium [1971] ECR 445 at para. 6.
Case 43/75, Defrenne v. SABENA [1976] ECR 455.
Case 170/84, Bilka Kaufhaus GmbH v. von Hartz [1986] ECR 1607.
Directive 86/378 OJ 1986 L225/40.
Case 262/88, Barber v. Guardian Royal Exchange [1990] ECR I-1889.

502

International Law and International Relations

reduced the potential tensions by limiting the retrospective application
of the principles. * The Court’s language was vague:
The direct effect of Article 119 of the Treaty may not be relied upon in order to
claim entitlement to a pension with effect from a date prior to that of this
judgment, except in the case of workers or those claiming under them who have
before that date initiated legal proceedings or raised an equivalent claim under
the applicable national law.

This could be interpreted in many ways. At the conservative extreme
the Court’s ruling might imply that only workers who joined occupational
pension schemes after the date of the judgment are eligible for equal
benefits. The liberal interpretation would be that the equal treatment
principle applies to future pension payments for all workers regardless of
when they joined. *
Why did the Court leave its retrospective limitation so ambiguous?
One plausible interpretation is that the ECJ may have made a vague ruling in order to gauge the reaction of member governments. Their reaction
was swift and decisive. The EU governments were extremely worried by
the enormous financial implications of the Barber decision, and they reacted in the strongest possible way – through treaty revision. The governments added a protocol to the Maastricht Treaty that limited the
application of the equal treatment principle to periods of work after the
Barber judgment.20
The ECJ responded to the ‘‘Barber protocol’’ in the 1993 case Ten
Oever.21 In this case the Court was asked to clarify the retrospective
limitation it had imposed in Barber. *** The Court *** affirmed the
governments’ preference as expressed in the protocol. In effect the Court’s
ruling said: ‘‘this is what we meant all along. The member governments
did not overrule us; they simply helped us clarify a point.’’
In two subsequent cases, however, the ECJ behaved in ways that
arguably challenged the Barber protocol. The Vroege22 and Fisscher23
cases concerned whether the retrospective limitation with regard to
pensionable ages established in Barber, and affirmed in the protocol, also
applied to the right to join occupational pension schemes. * The Court
20
21

22

23

Treaty on European Union, Protocol No. 2 on Article 119.
Case 109/91, Ten Oever v. Stichting Bedrijfspensioenfonds voor het Glazenwassers- en
Schoonmaakebedrijf [1993] ECR I-4879.
Case 57/93, Vroege v. NCIV Instituut voor Volkshuisvesting BV and Stichting Pensioenfonds NCIV [1994] ECR I-4541.
Case 128/93, Fisscher v. Voorhuis Hengelo BV and Stiching Bedrijfspensioenfonds voor
de Detail- handel [1994] ECR I-4583.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

503

decided that the retrospective limitation in Barber applied only to
equalization of pensionable ages and did not apply to the right to join
pension schemes. Therefore, Vroege and Fisscher could date the right to
join their pension schemes back to 8 April 1976, the date when Article
119 had been given direct effect in Defrenne No. 2. *
Ostensibly, these bold decisions circumscribed the applicability of the
Barber protocol to the specific issue involved in the Barber case (differences in pensionable ages) when it was likely that the governments had
intended the protocol to limit the retrospective application of Article 119
in general. But the ECJ provided member states with methods for limiting the financial consequences of these decisions. The Court held that
women would have to pay their back-contributions in order to join the
schemes retroactively – making it extremely unlikely that many would
choose this option. More importantly, the ECJ allowed member states to
maintain existing legislation limiting retrospective claims or to pass new
laws to this effect. * Women are now entitled to receive equal treatment
under pension schemes, but the full impact of this change will not be felt
for years, when this generation of workers retires.
We can learn three important lessons from this line of cases about the
interaction between the ECJ and the member governments. First, in
instances where the potential domestic ramifications of adverse ECJ
decisions are great member governments are unlikely to passively abide
by Court decisions. This is completely consistent with H2.
Second, as H3 suggests, Court decisions with costly domestic ramifications for all member governments are likely to provoke collective responses to rein in the Court. *** In this line of cases the ECJ was willing to
circumvent secondary legislation passed by the Council. Once the governments clearly signaled their resolve through a treaty revision, however,
the Court retreated.
Finally, this line of cases illustrates that the ECJ–member state game
is not one of complete information. If it were, the Court would not have
pushed so hard for an expansive interpretation of ‘‘equal pay’’ – because it
would have known that this was universally unacceptable among EU
member governments. In reality the Court did not anticipate the strength
of government opposition. Thus it floated a series of trial balloons – in the
form of open-ended decisions – designed to test the resolve of governments.
Because the precedents established in these decisions were vague, they did
not constrain the Court. Consistent with H1, the Court thus had room
to modify its interpretation in subsequent judgments to accommodate
member government preferences. ***

504

International Law and International Relations
State Liability for the Violation of EU Law

One of the central ways in which EU policy is made is through directives.
These are pieces of secondary legislation that member governments are
required to transpose into national law. This process, however, is plagued
by a fundamental problem. Governments that do not approve of an EU
directive (typically when passed by a qualified majority in the Council)
may not transpose it into national law on time, may transpose it
incorrectly, or may not transpose it at all. Moreover, until Maastricht,
the EU treaties made no provision for sanctioning member states that
failed to implement directives. Under Articles 169 and 170 of the Rome
treaty, the Commission or other governments may take a member state
to the ECJ for failing ‘‘to fulfill an obligation under this Treaty.’’ If the
Court finds the state to be in violation of a directive and that the relevant government failed to remedy the problem, the plaintiff can take
the government back to the ECJ (Article 171). But governments that
ignored ECJ rulings faced no penalties until the ratification of the
Maastricht Treaty. *
The Court sought in a series of decisions to increase the effectiveness
of EU directives, primarily by granting individuals legal recourse to them
in national courts even if their government had failed to transpose them
into national law (that is, the ‘‘direct effect’’ of directives). But direct effect
did not apply to all directives, and member governments continued to
evade their obligation to abide by them. Then in the landmark 1991
Francovich decision the ECJ ruled that governments must compensate
individuals for the loss caused to them resulting from the nonimplementation of directives, even those without direct effect.24 The implications of
Francovich are still not clear; the Court has yet to establish a system of
state liability for the violation of EU law. Here we speculate on the likely
course of interaction between the ECJ and member governments that
will determine the shape of such a system. ***
History of Direct Effect
We begin by sketching briefly the thirty-year history of the Court’s efforts
to empower individuals with respect to EU law. In 1963 the Court decided
that some EU provisions could have direct effect, conferring rights on
individuals rather than simply imposing duties on governments.25 The
24
25

Joined cases C-6/90 and 9/90, Francovich and Others v. Italy [1991] ECR I-5357.
Case 26/62, Van Gend en Loos [1963] ECR 1.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

505

ECJ then decided in Van Duyn that direct effect applied, in principle,
to directives.26 This decision was subsequently clarified, stating that
directives are only subject to direct effect when the deadline for national
implementation has passed.27
In 1986 the Court ruled that private parties could sue only the state,
not other private parties, for violating directives that have not been
transposed into national law.28 The Court’s next decision then sidestepped the whole notion of direct effect. In Marleasing the Court ruled
that where a directive had not been incorporated into national law,
domestic courts had to interpret existing national law in light of that
directive.[29] ***
But the ECJ was not yet finished with the issue of conferring individual rights under EU directives. With the passage of the Single European
Act and the spate of directives issued pursuant to it in order to complete
the internal market, the Commission stepped up its proceedings against
member governments with respect to the nonimplementation or ‘‘incorrect’’ implementation of directives. * The effectiveness of using Articles
169–171, however, was limited by the lack of enforcement provisions. As a
result, disobedient governments simply refused to implement judgments.
The best way to ensure real member government compliance with directives was for individuals to bring cases against their governments in
national courts for violations of their rights under EU law. In Francovich
the Court had the opportunity to make this possible.
The Francovich Ruling
Francovich concerned Italy’s failure to implement a directive intended to
ensure that employees received full payment of salary arrears if their
employers became insolvent.30 Even though the Commission brought
a successful proceeding against Italy under Article 169, Italy still took
no action to implement the directive.31 Francovich and others, who were
owed arrears of salary, then sued the Italian government. The case was
ultimately referred to the ECJ.
26
27
28

29
30
31

Case 41/74, Van Duyn v. Home Office [1974] ECR 1337.
Case 148/78, Ratti [1979] ECR 1629.
Case 152/84, Marshall v. Southampton and South West Hampshire Area Health
Authority (Teaching) [1986] ECR 723.
Case C-106/89, Marleasing [1990] ECR I-4135.
Directive 80/987 OJ L283/23, 1980 (‘‘Insolvency Directive’’).
Case 22/87, Commission v. Italy [1989] ECR 143.

506

International Law and International Relations

The Court held that the insolvency directive was not directly effective. *
It also ruled, however, that member governments are liable to compensate individuals for losses resulting from the nonimplementation of
a directive – even if the national legal systems do not permit such liability –
provided that three conditions are met. First, the directive must confer
rights on individuals. Second, these rights must be identifiable from the
provisions of the directive. Finally, a causal link must exist between the
breach of EU obligations by the national government and the loss suffered
by the individual.
Francovich thus represented a quantum leap in the Court’s intervention inside member states because it asserted that individuals’ claims to
damages from the violation of EU law did not depend on the doctrine of
direct effect. * The decision sent shock waves through European capitals.
Although Francovich concerned only a small number of limited claims,
the potential range of claimants and size of damages under the state
liability principle were virtually without limit.
The ECJ, however, did not address in Francovich the scope of the
state liability principle. A number of outstanding issues remained to be
resolved. Did the principle extend to cases where the Court ruled that
national implementing measures were inadequate? What about much
broader, and more vague, obligations under EU treaties? How far should
state liability go? What conditions should be established before states are
liable to pay damages?
How the ECJ answers these questions will ultimately determine the
impact of Francovich. An extensive interpretation by the Court would be
the capstone on more than thirty years of effort by the ECJ to expand and
entrench its authority. It is equally clear, however, that member governments will not passively accept such an interpretation. We now explore
the responses of member governments to Francovich.
Government Responses to Francovich
Earlier we sketched three possible responses by governments to adverse
ECJ decisions. The first – noncompliance by the litigant government – is
not at issue with respect to Francovich because the Italian government
has already accepted the decision. The other two collective responses –
statutory legislation and treaty revision – have been widely discussed by
member governments. Not surprisingly, the U.K. Conservative, government took the lead in trying to restrict the scope of Francovich. It claimed
that the question of state liability should be a matter of national law ***.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

507

This would limit state liability to cases in which governments have
shown ‘‘grave and manifest disregard’’ of their EU obligations – a very
strict condition that is rarely fulfilled.32 The British government also
advocated a statute of limitations restricting damage payments to recent
violations of EU norms.33 Furthermore, it demanded that existing
national laws be allowed to stand that limit the time span over which
damages must be paid.34
The broader issue of constitutional (that is, treaty) limitations on the
ECJ was widely discussed in the context of the 1996–97 Intergovernmental
Conference. The U.K. government proposed that a qualified majority in
the Council should be able to overturn ECJ decisions. *** A somewhat
less controversial British proposal sought to restrict to the highest court in
each member country the right to refer cases to the ECJ for ‘‘preliminary
judgments’’ (Article 177 EC).35 ***
As in so many other issues, however, British Conservatives were
outliers in Europe. * Some members of the EU – most notably, France
and Germany (along with their economic allies among the Benelux
countries and Austria) – attach a greater positive weight to the presence
of an effective legal system in Europe. These countries strongly support
the EU legal system for at least two reasons. First, [they] are deeply
committed to expanding European integration as a means of stabilizing
geopolitics on the continent. Second, the economies of the northern core of
the EU are those that benefit most from the removal of nontariff barriers to
trade in the EU, and the ECJ has been a powerful actor in furthering this
agenda. Thus these governments have strong incentives not to emasculate
the ECJ, even in the face of an incendiary decision such as Francovich.
We are not saying that those member governments that generally
support the rule of EU law should be expected to sit idly by and allow
the ECJ to entrench the state liability principle. They were, however,
reticent to follow the British lead of institutionalizing political
32

33
34

35

Submission of the British government to the ECJ regarding Factortame No. 3 (see
later). ***
See Daily Mail, 24 October 1995, 22; and The Times, 23 October 1995.
For example, when the British government was recently ordered by the Court to change
its prescription charge laws – a ruling that threatened to cost up to £500 million due
to reimbursing all men between the ages of sixty and sixty-four for charges dating back
five years – it cited a 1993 regulation applying a three-month time limit, reducing the
overall costs of compliance with the ruling to £40 million; Daily Mai, 24 October
1995, 22.
See Financial Times, 2 February 1995, 10; 3 April 1995, 17; 22 August 1995, 10; and
The Times, 23 October 1995.

508

International Law and International Relations

intervention in European law. The political consensus in the EU seems to
support two objectives limiting the Francovich ruling. The first is to adopt
restrictive criteria for establishing the liability of member states. The
second is to circumscribe the retrospective application of all ECJ rulings,
not only Francovich, and to allow existing national laws to stand that
constrain the time span over which damages must be paid.36
Toward a System of State Liability for the Violation of EU Law
How should we expect the ECJ to react to this political environment?
Given that the costs of Francovich to all member states are potentially
enormous (H2, H3), and given that the exact nature of the precedent set
in the case is unclear (H1), we anticipate that in the future the Court will
voluntarily restrict the application of the state liability doctrine in ways
desired by the bulk of member governments.
Four recent cases provide a preliminary test for our predictions. First, in
Brasserie du Peˆcheur a French brewing company sought damages from
the German government for losses incurred when forced to stop exporting beer to Germany because its product did not comply with the German
beer purity law (declared in violation of EU law by the ECJ in 1987).37
Second, in Factortame No. 3 a group of Spanish fishermen claimed
damages from the British government for losses incurred as a result of
the 1988 Merchant Shipping Act, ruled illegal by the ECJ in 1991.38
Third, in British Telecommunications the plaintiff sought damages
from the U.K. government for losses following the failure to implement
appropriately a directive on procurement procedures for utilities.39
Finally, in Dillenkofer a number of German tourists claimed damages
from the German government for its failure to implement a 1990 EU
directive on package tours.40
On 5 March 1996 the ECJ delivered its rulings in the Brasserie du
Peˆcheur and Factortame cases.41 The ECJ reaffirmed the principle
established in Francovich. It ruled that states have to pay damages if
three conditions are met: (1) the violated EU law must confer rights on
36
37
38
39
40
41

The Times, 23 October 1995.
Case C-46/93.
Case 48/93.
Case C-392/93.
Joined cases C-178/94, C-179/94, 188/90, 189/94, and 190/94.
Joined cases C-46/93 and C-48/93, Brasserie du Peˆcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR
I-0000.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

509

individuals, (2) the violation must be sufficiently serious, and (3) the
damage must have been directly caused by the violation. The ECJ stated
that a violation of EU law is ‘‘sufficiently serious’’ if it has persisted
despite a court ruling or if it is clear in light of settled case law. The
decisive test is whether the government has ‘‘manifestly and gravely’’
disregarded the limits of its discretion.
This formulation corresponds to the Court’s interpretation of Article
215 EC, which governs the noncontractual liability of EU institutions.
The ECJ left it to national courts to decide whether a violation of EU law
is sufficiently serious. National courts must also decide on the level of
damages. However, the ECJ ruled that damages must be no less than the
compensation for similar claims under domestic law. The Court held
that national liability laws apply as long as they do not make it ‘‘excessively difficult or impossible’’ to obtain effective compensation.
The ECJ ruled on the British Telecommunications case three weeks
later.42 The Court held that the conditions for establishing state liability
set out in its 5 March decision also applied to cases where a government
had incorrectly transposed a directive into national law. *** On 8
October 1996 the ECJ delivered its ruling in the Dillenkofer case.43
The Court reaffirmed the conditions set out in Brasserie du Peˆcheur and
Factortame and ruled that the failure to take any measure to transpose
a directive on time constituted a sufficiently serious violation of EU law.
The Court’s reasoning in these cases follows in three important ways
the prior proposals of national governments regarding limitations of the
Francovich principle. First, the ‘‘manifest and grave’’ violations proviso is
a very strict condition. *** Second, the Court held that only violations of
clear and unambiguous provisions would give an automatic right to
compensation ***. Third, the ECJ left it to national courts to adjudicate
state liability cases according to national liability laws. The Court thus
followed government demands that state liability should be a matter of
national law, subject to a minimum EU standard based on the principles
governing the liability of EU institutions.
These cases suggest that the ECJ is willing to tailor its state liability
rulings in ways that the core member governments, especially France and
Germany, wish. Nonetheless, a number of issues remain to be resolved.
The fact that liability claims are to be adjudicated according to national
42
43

Case 392/93, British Telecommunications [1996] ECR I-0000.
Joined cases C-178/94, C-179/94, 188/90, 189/94, and 190/94, Dillenkofer [1996] ECR
I-0000.

510

International Law and International Relations

liability laws raises the question of the extent to which the Court will
allow national statutes of limitation to stand. In most member states the
state incurs liability only under very restrictive substantive and procedural
conditions. * Thus national liability laws may provide member states with
an effective shield from liability in most cases and with an effective cap
on retrospective payments of damages. ***

conclusion
The existing literature on legal integration in the EU poses a stark
dichotomy between two views of ECJ–government interactions: the legal
autonomy and political power perspectives. This article has developed a
theoretical framework that is subtler and more balanced than either of
these perspectives. Moreover, we have subjected our view to empirical
tests that are much less vulnerable to the ‘‘sampling on the dependent
variable’’ critique. Our theoretical framework generated three independent hypotheses about the strategic interactions between the Court and
member governments. These hypotheses were then tested against a carefully selected set of cases in which we sought to hold constant as many
factors – other than those of direct bearing on our hypotheses – as possible.
The starting point of our theoretical analysis is that the ECJ is a strategic
actor that must balance conflicting constraints in its effort to further the
ambit of judicial review in the EU. On the one hand, the Court’s legal
legitimacy is contingent on its being seen as enforcing the law impartially
by following the rules of precedent. On the other hand, the Court cannot
afford to make decisions that litigant governments refuse to comply with
or, worse, that provoke collective responses from the EU governments to
circumscribe the Court’s authority. Understanding how these conflicting
constraints function requires careful delineation of the legal and political
conditions in particular cases.
The empirical analysis generated strong support for our three hypotheses. First, the greater the clarity of EU treaties, case precedent, and legal
norms in support of an adverse judgment, the greater the likelihood that
the ECJ will rule against litigant governments. Second, the greater the costs
of an ECJ ruling to important domestic constituencies or to the government itself, the greater the likelihood that the litigant government will not
abide by the decision. Third, the greater the costs of a ruling and the greater
the number of EU member governments affected by it, the greater the
likelihood that they will respond collectively to rein in EU activism – with
new secondary legislation revisions of the EU treaty base.

The European Court of Justice, National Governments

511

So much for the normal science. *** The ECJ is manifestly neither
master nor servant of EU member governments. As is more generally true
with respect to scholarship on European integration, engaging in labeling
debates – neofunctionalism versus intergovernmentalism, for instance – is
unproductive. Instead, research should concentrate on deriving empirically testable propositions from logical theoretical arguments and then
systematically evaluating them against the data. This article represents
our attempt to do this in the context of the strategic interactions between
the ECJ and EU member governments.
* * *

part vii
OTHER SUBSTANTIVE AREAS OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW

20
Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability
of Peace
Virginia Page Fortna

Why does peace sometimes last and sometimes fall apart? What, if anything, can be done to enhance the durability of peace in the aftermath of
war? Some cease-fires fall apart within days or months, others hold for
years, while others last indefinitely. Why, for example, did a cease-fire
in the Arab-Israeli war in 1948 fail within three months, while the next
one lasted for years? Why has peace so often faltered between India and
Pakistan but held, despite ongoing tensions, between North and South
Korea? Surprisingly little theoretical or empirical work has explored this
important question.
States have devised a number of mechanisms to try to make it easier
to maintain peace. These mechanisms are often implemented as part of
a cease-fire agreement. States set up demilitarized zones, accept international peacekeeping missions, establish dispute resolution procedures,
sign formal agreements, and undertake other steps to try to enhance
the prospects for peace. Do these measures work? If so, why? This article
begins to answer this question by analyzing the duration of peace after

Many friends and colleagues have given advice and comments on the larger project of
which this paper is a part. In particular I would like to thank Scott Bennett, Nora Bensahel,
Erik Bleich, Dan Drezner, Lynn Eden, Nisha Fazal, Jim Fearon, Wendy Franz, Erik Gartzke,
Chris Gelpi, Doug Gibler, Hein Goemans, Amy Gurowitz, Lise Howard, Bob Jervis, Bob
Keohane, Zeev Maoz, Lisa Martin, Dani Reiter, Don Rothchild, Evan Schofer, Curt
Signorino, Jack Snyder, Al Stam, Celeste Wallander, Barb Walter, Suzanne Werner, and four
anonymous reviewers. I am grateful also for research assistance from Carol St. Louis. This
project would not have been possible without financial and intellectual support from the
Olin Institute at Harvard University, the Center for International Security and Cooperation at
Stanford University, and the Institute of War and Peace Studies at Columbia University.

515

516

International Law and International Relations

international wars ending between 1946 and 1997. It draws on and develops theories of international cooperation to argue that measures
such as these help enemies overcome the cooperation problem inherent
in the aftermath of war. Students of international relations have long
drawn on contracting theory and the new economics of organization literature to examine how actors can achieve cooperation even as anarchy
makes it impossible to write enforceable contracts.1 Scholarship in this
vein points to a number of ways in which cease-fire agreements might
influence the chances of maintaining peace. I argue that mechanisms
within agreements can make durable peace more likely by changing the
incentives to break a cease-fire, by reducing uncertainty about actions
and intentions, and by preventing accidental violations from triggering another round of fighting. If this argument is correct, the content of
cease-fire agreements should affect whether peace lasts. Individually and
collectively, these measures should be associated with more durable
peace, all else being equal.
Scholars of international relations in the realist tradition likely would
argue that cease-fire agreements and the measures within them are at
best epiphenomenal. In these scholars’ view, agreements may reflect other
factors that affect durability, but arguments that they themselves shape
the chances for lasting peace are idealistic. In this view, agreements are
merely ‘‘scraps of paper.’’ They are not binding in an anarchical system
and should have no independent effect on international behavior, least
of all on decisions about war and peace.2 To test the effects of agreements on the durability of peace, one therefore needs to control for
other factors that affect the baseline prospects for peace. If, once these
variables are included, agreement mechanisms have no effect, then one
can conclude that agreements are only scraps of paper. If, however,
agreements matter even when the baseline prospects are accounted for,
this would support the argument that even deadly enemies can overcome
the obstacles to cooperation.
* * *
The first section of this article develops cooperation theory to explain
how specific mechanisms within cease-fire agreements might affect the

1
2

See Coase 1988; Martin 1993; Moe 1984; Oye 1986; and Williamson 1985.
This is akin to the argument that international institutions are epiphenomenal.
Mearsheimer 1994. See also Mearsheimer 2001. If agreements have no effect, however,
it is not clear why states bother to write them. Leeds, Long, and Mitchell 2000.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

517

durability of peace. This argument suggests that measures such as the
withdrawal of forces, creation of demilitarized zones, formal cease-fire
agreements, peacekeeping, third-party guarantees, and dispute resolution
procedures should help foster peace that lasts. The more of these measures implemented, the longer peace should last, all else being equal. This
section also lays out the counterargument and explores other variables
that might be expected to affect the baseline prospects for peace. *** The
second section describes the econometric model and the data set of ceasefires in international wars used to test these hypotheses. The findings,
presented in the third section, show that agreements are not merely
scraps of paper; rather, the implementation of specific mechanisms within
cease-fire agreements can help make peace last. Strong agreements lead
to more durable peace.
In this study I define peace merely as the absence of war. I do not
distinguish between relations that become very friendly and those that
remain acrimonious despite the absence of violence. Under my definition,
North and South Korea have been at ‘‘peace’’ for half a century. Clearly,
not all varieties of peace are equally desirable, nor does stability necessarily coincide with social justice. Nevertheless, most wars cause poverty, disease, and dislocation, and all entail the large-scale loss of human
life. Repeated conflict only exacerbates these tragedies. This study not
only indicates that states can overcome obstacles to maintaining peace in
war-torn areas, but also identifies the most effective ways of doing so.

cooperation theory and agreements
Maintaining peace in the aftermath of war requires cooperation. Because
war is costly, there is shared interest in avoiding renewed hostilities. This
shared interest, however, does not automatically lead to peace. Recent
belligerents have deeply conflicting interests and strong incentives to take
advantage of each other.3 They also have good reason to fear each other’s
intentions. Cooperation is therefore difficult to achieve. I argue that
cease-fire agreements can foster cooperation in several ways, by changing incentives, by reducing uncertainty about actions and intentions,
and by controlling accidental violations of the cease-fire.
This argument rests on three assumptions: (1) that states are rationally
led [but not that they are unitary actors;] (2) that war is costly, and not
desired for its own sake; and (3) that each ex-belligerent has incentives to
3

Keohane 1984; Oye 1986.

518

International Law and International Relations

take advantage of its opponent, or good reason to fear its opponent’s
intentions. I do not assume that both belligerents reach a cease-fire on
equal footing.4 There are usually winners and losers in war, and at least
one side’s acceptance of a cease-fire may have been ‘‘coerced.’’ However,
unless one side is completely eliminated in war, both sides can impose
costs on each other, and the problem of cooperation maintains.5
* * *
Conflicting interests give belligerents an incentive to break the cease-fire
in a bid to make unilateral gains on the battlefield. This is the familiar
game of prisoner’s dilemma. There may also be cases where neither side
would prefer to attack, even unopposed. However, there is no easy way for
actors to know this. In an atmosphere of deep mistrust in the aftermath of
war, each side has good reason to fear attack from its opponent. Uncertainty and fear about the other’s intentions can undermine
cooperation even where perfect information would automatically yield
a cooperative outcome. Security dilemma dynamics and their spirals of
fear and hostility are especially likely among states who have recently
engaged in mortal combat.6 With communication channels severed during the war, and enemies likely to assume the worst about each other,
incidents along the cease-fire line, even if accidental or the result of rogue
forces, can reignite war. Peace is precarious.
A hypothetical case helps illustrate the obstacles to peace. Imagine
two states that have just fought a war over a piece of territory (Israel and
Syria in 1973, perhaps, or El Salvador and Honduras after the 1969 Football War). The war was costly and the two states would prefer not to fight
again, but they would each like more of the disputed land, preferably all
of it. Both believe it to be rightfully theirs, and domestically, occupation
of any part of it by the enemy is seen as a travesty. The side that lost
territory in the war has an incentive to try to win it back, and the side
that gained may hope it can now claim more. Both sides therefore have
incentives to try to encroach upon the other, or even to make a dramatic
advance, to push the cease-fire line farther toward the other side.
4

5

6

For the sake of simplicity, I discuss the problem of cooperation as involving only two
states. A number of wars in this study have multiple belligerents. These are split into
separate dyadic observations in the quantitative research discussed below.
Kecskemeti 1964. The only case examined here in which one side was eliminated by the
other is South Vietnam’s fall to the North in 1975.
Jervis 1978. In assurance games such as stag hunt, it is the grave payoff of being attacked
and the difficulty of assessing intentions that makes cooperation risky.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

519

Moreover, both states have good reason to fear encroachment or attack by the other. These fears have likely been exacerbated by leaders’
inflammatory remarks for domestic consumption. Both sides will be particularly wary of military maneuvers, resupply efforts, or anything that
might be a precursor to a new attack. When the fighting stopped, soldiers
were likely left in close proximity to their enemies, facing each other
‘‘eyeball-to-eyeball’’ across the cease-fire line. The chance of troops firing
across the line or of skirmishes as each side tries to improve its position
is quite high. If irregular troops were involved in the fighting, or if command and control are somewhat loose, there may be incidents of unauthorized attacks or advances. In such a tense atmosphere of mistrust,
with normal diplomatic channels cut, such small clashes can easily escalate. Whether through deliberate action, spirals of fear and preemption,
or accident and involuntary defection, the probability of war erupting
anew is high.7
Although both sides are better off with peace, they cannot simply
declare peace and leave it at that. Their commitments to maintain peace
are not credible.8 An actor with hostile intentions has an incentive to
say it will abide by the cease-fire so that its partner will cooperate and be
‘‘suckered’’ into letting down its guard and perhaps leaving itself vulnerable to attack. In international relations, of course, there is no external
enforcement power to prevent actors from such cheating. This is the
central problem of cooperation under anarchy in international relations.
So how do deadly enemies ever achieve peace? Cease-fire arrangements rely on reciprocity and mutual deterrence. Each side stops fighting in exchange for the other side doing the same. If either breaks the
cease-fire, the other will respond in kind. It is the prospect of return fire
that deters attack. This is so central to the notion of a cease-fire that
it may seem quite obvious. However, for reciprocity and deterrence to
work, several things must be true: the cost of reinitiating conflict must
outweigh the incentives to attack; it must be easy to distinguish
7

8

Reiter (1995) found preemption to be rare as the sole cause of war. But conflicts that start
or escalate to war through preemption are most likely among deadly enemies, such as
Israel and its Arab neighbors in 1967. Similarly, wars rarely start purely by accident, but
escalating clashes, often at least partially the result of accidents or unauthorized action,
can contribute to the spiral toward war. Such was the case between India and Pakistan
in 1965, and arguably again in 1999. Escalating clashes led to the second war between
China and Vietnam, and to serious fighting short of full-scale war between Honduras and
El Salvador in 1976.
For analyses of the problem of credible commitments as an obstacle to peace see Fearon
1995; and Walter 2001.

520

International Law and International Relations

compliance from noncompliance; both sides must be reassured about
each other’s intentions, especially if there is a military advantage to
striking first; and accidents must be prevented from triggering another
war. These requisites suggest both the obstacles to peace and strategies
for overcoming them.
Cease-fire agreements can employ three types of strategies to ensure
that peace lasts: changing incentives by making it more costly to attack;
reducing uncertainty about actions and intentions; and preventing or
controlling accidental violations. These strategies suggest specific observable mechanisms, the effects of which are tested below.
Altering Incentives
*** [There] are steps belligerents and the international community can
take to increase the costs of an attack. These steps widen the bargaining
space between belligerents and make another bout of war less likely.
Adversaries can tie their own hands by physically constraining their
ability to attack. Withdrawal of troops from the front line, creation of
a demilitarized buffer zone, and arms control make remobilizing for
war more difficult. These actions also make a successful surprise attack
much less likely.
Belligerents may also be able to alter incentives by declaring their ceasefire formally. By signing a formal agreement, states invoke international
law. Of course, with no higher authority to enforce it, international law is
not binding in the way that domestic law is. International agreements can
be broken, but breaking them risks losing international aid and military
support, and legitimizes retaliation by the other side. Formal and public
declaration of a cease-fire thus invokes international audience costs. *
Actors may also turn to outsiders to help them enforce a cease-fire.
Commitment by a third party to guarantee the peace serves as a deterrent,
again by raising the cost of noncompliance. An external guarantor takes
on some of the responsibility for retaliation in the event of defection.
The presence of peacekeeping troops interposed between forces may also
serve as a physical and reputational buffer to ensure the cease-fire.
Reducing Uncertainty About Actions and Intentions
Agreements can reduce uncertainty by specifying the terms of a ceasefire. Marking the exact location of the cease-fire line provides a focal
point that can help prevent ‘‘salami tactic’’ attempts to push the line to

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

521

either side’s advantage. Spelling out the rules of the cease-fire explicitly
helps to define compliance and noncompliance, which serves to prevent
misunderstandings and avoid unnecessary tension. The more specific
the agreement, the less uncertainty there will be about what constitutes
compliance.
Verification mechanisms can alleviate concerns about detecting aggressive moves by the opponent in time to respond. Monitoring may be
less important in cease-fire agreements than other sorts of agreements,
because states are likely to rely on national intelligence for warning of
an attack, and it is difficult to hide aggression once it starts. However,
neutral referees can play an important role in fostering stable peace.
Because it is costly to be seen as the aggressor, states will try to blame
the other side for any fighting that starts. Without neutral observers, claims
of being the victim of aggression are not credible and there are bound
to be disputes over ‘‘who started it.’’ Monitors to investigate incidents
and provide unbiased information on compliance are therefore important for distinguishing unprovoked aggression from legitimate retaliation. The international audience costs of breaking a cease-fire, therefore,
often depend on impartial monitoring.
Physical constraints, audience costs, and third-party guarantees or
peacekeeping efforts change belligerents’ incentives, but also serve as
important signaling devices that can reduce uncertainty about intentions.
Willingness to accept measures that make war more costly is a credible
signal of benign intent. States contemplating an attack will be less willing
than those with nobler intentions to sign on to measures that increase
the physical or political cost of fighting. Critics might argue that this concedes the point that agreements are epiphenomenal; only those who intend to abide by the cease-fire will agree to strong mechanisms, but it is
the intentions, not the mechanisms, doing the causal work. This argument is unfalsifiable, as is there is no way to measure intentions a priori
(if there were, international relations would be very different and war
might not exist at all). But it also misses the point. Of course intentions matter. One of the ways in which agreements affect the durability of
peace is by providing credible ways of signaling these intentions and
overcoming the security dilemma.
In the abstract, there are two distinct causal pathways possible: one
in which agreement mechanisms influence peace directly by constraining
states or providing information, and another in which mechanisms simply
signal intentions. However, the two pathways are not so easily distinguished in reality. As the literature on signaling and ‘‘cheap talk’’

522

International Law and International Relations

suggests, if there are incentives to misrepresent, as there surely are
among deadly enemies, signals are only credible if they are costly. For a
state to limit its ability to wage war, or to open itself up to verification is
costly, and therefore credible. That is, the indirect signaling function depends in large part on the more direct effects of agreement mechanisms. *
Controlling Accidents
Reciprocal strategies can be very vulnerable to accidents and misunderstandings. If troops stray over the cease-fire line, or fire accidentally, and
the other side retaliates, the situation can quickly spiral back into fullblown war. If leaders do not exercise full control over their troops (or
in some cases over civilians), rogue groups opposed to peace can easily
upset it by violating the cease-fire and provoking retaliation.
Ongoing negotiations and dispute resolution procedures can alleviate
this danger by preventing misunderstandings and providing a forum for
resolving differences before a spiral of retaliation is triggered. However,
because both sides have an incentive to blame violations on accidents or
rogue factions, communication by itself may not always be credible.
Withdrawal of forces, buffer zones, and arms control can help prevent accidents and misunderstandings from occurring in the first place.9
‘‘Confidence-building measures’’ to regulate and make transparent behavior (such as military exercises) that is likely to cause tension can also
prevent misunderstandings and alleviate suspicions. Cease-fire agreements often hold each state responsible for violations coming from its
own territory, to prevent these violations from being used as an excuse
for intentional defection. Agreements may also include concrete measures for internal control to deal with this problem of ‘‘involuntary
defection.’’10 In addition to acting as referees, international monitors
investigate and mediate small clashes and disputes to keep them from
escalating.
The theory put forth here is an institutionalist argument about mechanisms to overcome the obstacles to cooperation. I hypothesize that
agreements can enhance the durability of peace by raising the cost of
breaking a cease-fire, reducing uncertainty, and preventing and controlling accidents. While these three strategies for maintaining peace are
9
10

On the role of arms control in providing stability, see Jervis 1993.
For example, irregular forces were disarmed after the Football War between El Salvador
and Honduras. The United Nations Emergency Force was given responsibility for
pursuing fedayeen (guerrillas) in the Sinai after 1956.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

523

presented separately, their functions are intimately connected, and specific
mechanisms often serve several purposes. For example, monitoring by
peacekeepers reduces uncertainty by ensuring that defectors will be
caught. This also raises the cost of reinitiating war. In practice, much of
peacekeepers’ day-to-day work entails mediation and the prevention of
small clashes from spiraling out of control. Physical constraints that
alter the incentives for war also necessarily reduce fears of impending
attack and reduce the likelihood of accidents. Belligerents’ willingness to
implement measures to tie their own hands and raise the cost of attack
serves as a credible signal of commitment and thereby reduces uncertainty and makes accidents easier to control.
While analytically distinct, the strategies of raising costs, reducing uncertainty, and controlling accidents therefore overlap in practice. The
strategies themselves cannot be observed directly. But the specific mechanisms discussed above can be observed and their effects tested empirically.
I focus on the following measures: withdrawal of forces, establishment of
demilitarized zones, arms control, measures to control potential rogue
groups, third-party involvement, peacekeeping, confidence-building measures, dispute resolution procedures, the specificity of agreements, and
whether agreements are formal or tacit.
I use the term ‘‘strength of agreement’’ to refer to the number and extent of the measures implemented as part of a cease-fire. Agreement
strength varies from none, if a cease-fire takes place with no agreement or
without implementing any of the measures listed above (as when the
second war between China and Vietnam simply fizzled out with no real
cease-fire agreement), to very strong if the agreement implements significant buffer zones, peacekeepers, confidence-building measures, is formal
and very specific, and so on. (The agreements reached between Israel and
Egypt after the Yom Kippur war, as well as the Korean Armistice, are
examples.) If the cooperation theory spelled out here is correct, peace
should last longer, ceteris paribus, the stronger the agreement implemented. Furthermore, each of the individual measures should be associated with more durable peace. Both together and separately, these
mechanisms are hypothesized to increase the stability of peace.
Political Settlement
Altering incentives, reducing uncertainty, and controlling accidents are all
rather apolitical strategies for avoiding war. But the political content of
an agreement should also be important. Resolving the underlying issues

524

International Law and International Relations

of conflict, if it is possible, is a way of removing the reason to fight. Whether
an agreement purports to settle the political issues over which the war
was fought, rather than simply to stop hostilities, should affect stability.
I focus on the more mechanical tools for maintaining peace, because
settlement of the basic political issues, whether by agreement or by force,
is quite rare in the post–World War II era. *** Nevertheless, when a settlement of substantive political issues is reached, whether imposed or agreed
to, one should expect it to be associated with stable peace.
The Counterargument: Agreements Are Epiphenomenal,
Merely ‘‘Scraps of Paper’’
All else being equal, stronger agreements should lead to more durable
peace. All else is not equal, however. The agreement aside, peace will be
easier to maintain in some cases than in others. The counterargument to
the hypothesis that agreements can foster peace is that when cooperation is
relatively easy, parties will be able to draft strong agreements. These are the
very cases in which peace will last in any case. Conversely, when cooperation is difficult and the chances of peace falling apart are high for
other reasons, belligerents will be unable to conclude agreements that do
anything more than paper over differences. According to this argument,
agreements are merely epiphenomenal; they reflect other factors that
determine the duration of peace but have no independent effect of
their own.
*** [It] is thus crucial to control for other variables that might affect the
baseline prospects for peace (the ‘‘degree of difficulty,’’ as it were) to test
accurately the effects of cease-fire agreements.11 In the empirical tests
below, I control for a series of factors that make peace more or less
difficult to maintain, [including whether the war ended in a decisive
military victory or a stalemate,12 the cost of war, the belligerents’ history
of conflict before the war, whether the war threatened a state’s very
existence,13 contiguity14 changes in relative military capabilities, and
democracy.15]
11
12

13
14
15

Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom 1996.
Wars that end with a victor-imposed regime change are particularly stable. Werner 1999.
There are only a few such cases in the data examined here, however. Controlling for this
variable by dropping these cases makes no change to the results presented.
See Powell 1991; Fearon 1998; and Smith and Stam 2001. ***
See Bremer 1992; and Hensel 2000.
See Russett 1993; and Brown, Lynn-Jones, and Miller 1997. Leadership changes do not
have a significant effect on the resumption of war. Werner 1999.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

525

If the counterargument that cease-fire agreements are epiphenomenal
is correct, the strength of agreements should have no bearing once these
other factors are taken into account.

method: model and data
The Econometric Model
This article examines the duration of peace; why some cease-fires fall
apart quickly while others last longer. ***
*** Duration models (also known as hazard rate or survival time
models), [such as the Weibull model used here,] estimate the effects of independent variables on the length of time something lasts, and the models can
incorporate our uncertainty about how long the phenomenon, (in this case,
peace,) will continue into the future [(i.e., the issue of censored data).]16
The Cease-Fires Data Set
To test the hypotheses laid out above, I constructed a data set that includes
information on cease-fires and how long they lasted; on the situation
between the belligerents at the time of cease-fire (their history of conflict,
the decisiveness of military victory, etc.) as well as changes over time (in
relative capabilities, regime type, etc.); and detailed information on the
nature and content of any agreement and peace mechanisms that
accompanied or followed the cease-fire.
The data set covers cease-fires in international wars ending between
1946 and 1997. Each case is a cease-fire between a pair of principal
belligerents in the Correlates of War Version 3 (COW) data set’s list of
interstate wars. I split multilateral wars from the COW data set into
separate dyads and eliminated minor participants.17 A cease-fire is defined
as an end to or break in the fighting, whether or not it represents the
end of the war. It need not be accomplished through an explicit agreement. COW wars in which fighting stopped and started again are divided
into separate cases, one for each cease-fire. During the first Arab-Israeli
16

17

[The findings are no different in a Cox proportional hazard model. The Weibull is
preferred because it gives more precise estimates in a small data set like the one used here.
Box-Steffensmeier and Jones 1997, 1435. For a technical explanation of duration models,
see Greene 1993.]
Defined as those contributing less than one-tenth the number of troops committed by the
largest provider of troops.

526

International Law and International Relations

war in Palestine, for example, there was a break in the fighting in 1948
in accordance with a United Nations (UN) Security Council resolution
ordering a cease-fire. Three months later, the cease-fire failed when
Israel launched an offensive to seize the Negev. Another cease-fire ended
the war in 1949. I treat these as distinct cases. History tends to forget
the failed cease-fires, focusing only on the ones that succeeded in ending the war. Breaking these into separate cases is therefore crucial to
avoid selecting on the dependent variable.18 Cease-fires range in length
from two weeks (the first Turco-Cypriot cease-fire) to fifty years and
counting (Korea).
Because wars that start and stop again are treated as separate
observations, and because multilateral wars are split into dyads, not all
of the cases in the data set are independent of one another. I correct for the
statistical problem of autocorrelation by calculating robust standard
errors,19 but a substantive caveat should also be noted. Because the
Arab-Israeli conflict has been both multilateral and oft-repeated, much
of the data set thus consists of Middle East cases. Domination of the
data set by one conflict raises issues of generalizability. However, in
neither the quantitative work, nor related case-study research have I
found significant differences between the Middle East cases and others
that would skew results.20
There are forty-eight cease-fire cases in the data set. *** Each of these
cease-fires is a subject for which there are multiple observations over
time, each of a year or less, for a total of 876 observations. This allows
me to record changes in military capabilities over time, the arrival or
departure of peacekeepers, or the fact that a new agreement has been
reached implementing new measures. These are known as ‘‘time-varying
covariates’’ in the duration analysis lingo. For each subject, the time
spans run continuously to the start of a new war or the end of the data
at the beginning of 1998. The duration model treats each subject as a
history, focusing on whether peace survived each time period in the
18

19

20

I used COW data on when states ‘‘left’’ and ‘‘reentered’’ the war, supplemented by my
research, to determine these breaks in the fighting. It is possible that I have missed some
very short-lived cease-fires. This selection bias should work against my own argument,
however, as brief cease-fires are much more likely to be reported if accompanied by strong
agreements than by weak ones.
These are calculated using Huber’s method, with cases clustered by conflict. All of the
Arab-Israeli cases are one cluster, all of the India-Pakistan cases another, and so on. Cases
are assumed to be independent between clusters but not necessarily within clusters.
Where controlling for Arab-Israeli Cases made a significant difference in the results, it is
discussed below.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

527

history. Peace is considered to fail at the start of another COW war
between the same two belligerents. The data set is censored at the end of
1997.21 War resumes eventually in twenty-one cases ***.
Data on the various aspects of agreements come from my research on
each case.22 I investigated and coded the following aspects of agreements: the extent of withdrawal of forces, demilitarized zones, arms
control measures, peacekeeping (whether a monitoring mission or a
peacekeeping force, and whether the mission was new or was left over
from a previous mission before the war broke out), third-party involvement in peacemaking or guarantees of the peace, the specificity of
any agreement, whether it was formal or tacit, dispute resolution procedures, confidence-building measures, measures to control possible
rogue action, and whether the political issues over which the war was
fought were settled. ***
Not all of the cease-fires are accompanied by agreements, of course.
The data set includes a number of cases in which fighting stopped with
a unilateral withdrawal, in which war simply fizzled to an end with no
explicit cease-fire, or in which fighting ended with the installation by
one side of a ‘‘friendly’’ government for the other (as in Hungary in
1956). In such cases, the mechanisms under discussion here are coded as
zero unless measures were implemented in the absence of an agreement.
Agreement strength is measured in two ways. One is simply an index of
the mechanisms implemented, with a point for a demilitarized zone, another for arms control measures, half for a monitoring mission or one for
an armed peacekeeping force, and so on. This measure is crude but has the
benefit of being objective and replicable by others. It ranges from 0 to 10.
The other is a more subjective coding of the extent of the measures implemented. This measure is a five-point scale ranging from none for cease-fires
with no mechanisms *** to very strong for formal, detailed agreements
with peacekeeping contingents, demilitarized zones, dispute resolution
procedures, and so on ***. It is derived from a qualitative comparison of
all of the cases in the data set.23 The objective and subjective measures
21

22

23

The North Vietnam–South Vietnam case is censored immediately because South Vietnam
ceased to exist.
Sources included references surveying international conflict in the postwar era (including
Bercovitch and Jackson 1997; Brogan 1992; Butterworth 1976; Goldstein 1992; Miall
1992; and Tillema 1991), secondary sources on each conflict, and primary documents,
including cease-fire agreement texts.
Note that neither measure includes whether the agreement settled the political issues over
which the war was fought, which I consider separately.

528

International Law and International Relations

are highly correlated (.88). Using both helps ensure that the subjective
coding is not biased and that the objective coding is fairly accurate.
Data on situational or control variables come from existing data sets. A
dummy variable marks whether the war ended in a tie or in a military
victory for one side. The COST OF WAR measure is based on battle
deaths. HISTORY OF CONFLICT measures the extent to which the
belligerents’ shared past is marked by serious disputes. I include measures
noting whether one side’s very existence was threatened by the war, ***
and whether belligerents are contiguous ***. Following Werner, I use the
COW material capabilities data to measure changes in relative capabilities.24 [Other control variables, including whether the fight was over
territory, whether the war involved more than two states, and] measures
of expected utility, were tested, but found to have no significant effect
(results not shown).25,26

findings
Baseline Prospects for Peace
*** Table 20.1 shows the statistical results. Coefficients indicate the effect
of variables on the hazard of war resuming. Positive coefficients indicate
variables associated with peace that falls apart more quickly (a higher
hazard of failing), and negative coefficients mark variables associated
with more durable peace (a lower risk of another war). To give a sense of
the relative size of effects, the right-hand column presents estimated hazard ratios for variables found to have a significant effect. Hazard ratios
are interpreted relative to a baseline of one: a ratio of 0.50 indicates
that the hazard is cut in half, while a ratio of 2.0 indicates a doubling of
the risk of another war.
24

25
26

[Werner 1999.] Because democratic dyads never fight, there are no cease-fires between
democratic states, but some dyads become jointly democratic after a cease-fire is in place
(for example, Britain and Argentina after 1983). Joint democracy may make peace more
durable, but the finding depends largely on how one codes Cyprus during the extremely
short-lived cease-fire in 1974. It is also called into question by the 1999 Kargil War
between India and Pakistan (which occurs after the data used here are censored). For
further discussion of these cases and the relationship between democracy and the
durability of peace, see Fortna 2004, chap. 3. Here, I control for the possible effects of
the democratic peace by dropping those few observations in which both states are
democracies (based on Polity data) in some tests.
Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman 1992.
Coding details and the data are available online at ,http://www.columbia.edu/;vpf4/
scraps.htm..

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

529

table 20.1. Agreement Strength (Weibull Estimates)
1
Agreement strength
(subjective measure)
Variables

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

2
Index of strength
(objective measure)
Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

0.25***
(0.06)
3.63***
(0.33)
0.68***
(0.18)
0.95***
(0.26)
2.31***
(0.31)
1.20***
(0.24)
0.85***
(0.19)
6.60***
(1.72)
0.91
(0.06)
727
47
40.62

0.78

AGREEMENT STRENGTH

None
Very weak
Weak
Moderate
Strong

0.32 js
1.38
(0.52)
0.40 js
1.50
(0.38)
(omitted category)
0.83*** js
0.43
(0.21)
1.70 js
0.18
(1.50)

INDEX OF AGREEMENT
STRENGTH
TIE

COST OF WAR

HISTORY OF CONFLICT

EXISTENCE AT STAKE

CONTIGUOUS

CHANGE IN RELATIVE
CAPABILITIES

Constant
Shape parameter p
N
Subjects
Log likelihood

3.53***
(0.61)
0.55***
(0.21)
0.90***
(0.31)
2.10***
(0.31)
1.38***
(0.44)
0.82***
(0.20)
8.37***
(2.44)
0.90
(0.08)
727
47
39.78

34.28
0.58
2.46
8.13
3.99
2.28

37.58
0.50
2.59
10.10
3.31
2.33

Note: Cases of joint democracy are dropped. Negative coefficients and hazard ratios ,1
indicate decrease in risk of another war (increase in duration of peace). Positive coefficients
and hazard ratios .1 indicate increase in risk of another war (decrease in duration of peace).
RSE 5 robust standard errors, js 5 jointly significant.
*** p  .01.
** p  .05.
* p  .10. Two-tailed tests used.

530

International Law and International Relations

[Consider first the control variables that shape the baseline prospects
for peace.] Wars that end in a tie are much *** more likely to be repeated
than those that end with a decisive victory for one side. More costly wars are
followed by substantially more durable peace, all else being equal. Peace is
significantly more fragile between belligerents with more acrimonious
shared histories, and is almost six times more precarious when one side’s
existence is threatened by the conflict.27 *** Neighboring states are
[more likely] to fight again, but [note that] this finding is not always
statistically significant.28
As Werner’s argument would predict, changes in relative capabilities
over time do seem to be associated with the resumption of war.29 ***
* * *
These findings suggest that it will be much harder to maintain peace
in a case like the 1948 cease-fire in the Arab-Israeli War – which took
place without a clear victor, between states whose entire history was
marked by violence, and with the very existence of one side at stake – than
in a case such as the Falklands War, fought by states a long distance from
each other with little previous history of militarized conflict, ending in
a very lopsided victory for Britain, with a relatively low death toll.
* * *
Agreement Strength
[Turn now to our primary variables of interest, the measures of agreement strength at the top of Table 20.1.] *** The subjective coding of
agreement strength is a categorical variable (none, very weak, weak,
moderate, strong). Model 1 shows the comparison to the omitted middle
category (weak). As expected, the strongest agreements yield the most
durable peace, and moderately strong agreements perform better than
27
28

29

The latter finding is driven largely, but not entirely, by the Arab-Israeli cases.
While neighbors are more likely to fight in the first place, all of the states in these data
have proven themselves to have both reason to fight and the ability to reach each other
militarily. It is thus not surprising that the effects of contiguity are weaker for the
resumption of war than for propensity to fight in the first place.
[But it is not entirely clear from this finding which way the arrows run. Do changes in
relative capabilities lead to war, or does war lead to changes in relative capability? For
example, was the India-Pakistan war over Bangladesh caused by Pakistan’s falling
capabilities, or did the war, which severed Pakistan in two, cause our measures of
capability to drop? A lagged measure of the change in relative capabilities has no positive
effect on the risk of war, casting significant doubt on the finding that changes in relative
capabilities cause peace to break down.]

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

531

weak ones. Compared to the median agreement (weak), moderate agreements reduce the risk of another war by an estimated 57 percent (as
indicated by the hazard ratio of 0.43), and strong agreements reduce the
hazard of failure by more than 80 percent. Very weak agreements are
associated with the least durable peace, faring perhaps even worse than no
agreement at all. But compared to the middle category, peace falls apart
more quickly with both very weak and no agreements. These effects are
jointly significant.30
The findings are even clearer if one uses the objective index of agreement strength (Model 2). The negative and statistically significant coefficient indicates that the stronger the agreement, the longer peace lasts, all
else being equal. A unit increase in agreement strength is associated
with about a 20 percent reduction in the risk of another war. Overall,
I find fairly strong support for the hypothesis that the content of agreements matter. Even when one takes the baseline prospect for peace into
account, stronger agreements lead to more durable peace.
* * *
Assessing Individual Peace Mechanisms
Although mechanisms to alter incentives, reduce uncertainty, and control
accidents are effective in the aggregate, examining the effects of each
peace mechanism individually is important to know how best to maintain peace. Tables 20.2 to 20.4 show the results of each mechanism in
turn, controlling for the baseline prospects for peace. Unfortunately,
the small data set and problems of multicolinearity mean it is not possible to test all of these measures simultaneously. Because many aspects
of agreements are correlated, it is difficult to reach strong conclusions
about which measures are most effective relative to each other. For each
mechanism, I checked the results controlling for the other aspects of
agreements that were highly correlated with the measure under consideration.31 Including correlated aspects of agreements solves the omitted
variable bias but introduces multicolinearity, which reduces the efficiency of the estimates. Note that while the trade-off between multicolinearity and omitted variable bias makes it difficult to assess precisely
the relative merits of each aspect of agreements, it does not call into
30
31

Joint significance is determined with F-tests using STATA’s ‘‘test’’ command.
Where findings are not robust to these changes in model specification, I note this in the
discussion below.

International Law and International Relations

532

table 20.2. Individual Peace Mechanisms (Weibull Estimates)

Variables
WITHDRAWAL

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

0.33
(0.75)

0.72

0.83*
(0.47)
2.38**
(1.03)
0.45
(0.48)

0.43

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

0.70
(0.78)
0.28
(1.21)

2.01

1.33
(1.02)
15.54***
(0.97)
3.26***
(0.36)
0.85***
(0.21)
0.56*
(0.31)
2.22***
(0.84)
1.68***
(0.45)
0.66***
(0.18)
6.07***
(2.32)
0.83
(0.11)
770

3.79

DEMILITARIZED ZONES

Partial
Full
ARMS CONTROL

0.09
1.57

INTERNAL CONTROL

Responsible
Concrete

1.32

THIRD-PARTY

Mediation
Guarantee
TIE

COST OF WAR

HISTORY OF CONFLICT

EXISTENCE AT STAKE

CONTIGUOUS

CHANGE IN RELATIVE
CAPABILITIES

Constant
Shape parameter p
N

3.47***
(0.32)
0.45**
(0.19)
1.16***
(0.16)
1.85***
(0.65)
0.76
(0.48)
1.13***
(0.22)
7.49***
(2.64)
0.76**
(0.10)
770

32.10
0.64
3.20
6.35
2.13
3.09

0.000
26.04
0.43
1.75
9.16
5.35
1.93

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

Variables
Subjects
Log likelihood

Coefficient
(RSE)
48
46.07

Hazard
ratio

Coefficient
(RSE)

533

Hazard
ratio

48
44.33

Note: Negative coefficients and hazard ratios ,1 indicate decrease in risk of another war
(increase in duration of peace). Positive coefficients and hazard ratios .1 indicate increase in
risk of another war (decrease in duration of peace).
RSE 5 robust standard errors.
*** p  .01.
** p  .05.
* p  .10.
Two-tailed tests used.

doubt the general finding that agreements matter in the construction of
durable peace. The bias arises because the omitted agreement mechanisms also affect the durability of peace, contradicting the null hypothesis that agreements do not matter.
As Table 20.3 indicates, withdrawing forces from the cease-fire line
may reduce the risk of another war, but not significantly so. Troops withdraw to the status quo ante in about one-third of the cases examined
here, suggesting that the norm against taking (and keeping) territory
by force is fairly strong. Failure to withdraw from land captured during
war has often laid the seeds for another round of fighting (the continuing strife over territories occupied by Israel in 1967 being the best
example). But returning to the prewar lines does not ensure peace. Israel
and Egypt fought again after Israel withdrew from the Sinai in 1956, for
example.
Demilitarized zones (DMZs) to separate troops help foster durable
peace. Even partial or very limited zones can help reduce the danger of
accidents and skirmishes (for example, the number of incidents between
India and Pakistan dropped markedly when narrow DMZs were established after the first and second Kashmir wars), but this effect is only
marginally significant. However, full DMZs (defined as those 2 km wide
or more, running the full length of the cease-fire line) have a clear stabilizing effect, reducing the hazard of another war by about 90 percent.
DMZs have contributed to peace between El Salvador and Honduras
after the Football War, in Korea, and between Israel and Syria in the
Golan Heights. Arms control measures have not reduced the likelihood
of recurrent war.32
32

The sign of the coefficient for arms control flip-flops depending on model specification.

International Law and International Relations

534

table 20.3. Individual Peace Mechanisms (Weibull Estimates)
All peacekeeping
Variables

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

New peacekeeping only
Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

PEACEKEEPING

Monitors
Armed forces
TIE

COST OF WAR

HISTORY OF CONFLICT

EXISTENCE AT STAKE

CONTIGUOUS

CHANGE IN RELATIVE
CAPABILITIES

Constant
Shape parameter p
N
Subjects
Log likelihood

1.10*
(0.59)
0.21
(0.80)
3.79***
(0.47)
0.70***
(0.18)
1.27***
(0.29)
2.35***
(0.23)
0.97**
(0.40)
0.80***
(0.23)
5.78***
(1.88)
0.76*
(0.11)
770
48
46.78

0.33
0.81
44.24
0.50
3.56
10.50
2.63
2.23

6.87***
(2.62)
7.29*
(4.05)
11.17**
(4.50)
1.84*
(1.10)
7.38**
(3.77)
7.66*
(4.27)
1.43**
(0.69)
0.16
(0.37)

0.001
0.001
70898.3
0.16
1605.81
2124.89
4.17
0.85

15.18**
(7.34)
1.82
(1.18)
593
37
16.67

Note: Negative coefficients and hazard ratios ,1 indicate decrease in risk of another war
(increase in duration of peace). Positive coefficients and hazard ratios .1 indicate increase
in risk of another war (decrease in duration of peace).
RSE 5 robust standard errors.
*** p  .01.
** p  .05.
* p  .10. Two-tailed tests used.

Nor have measures to establish internal control over potential rogue
groups made peace more stable. A number of cease-fire agreements specify that each side is responsible for any hostile action coming from its
territory. Such statements are not effective at making states rein in

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

535

irregular forces; in fact these statements are more likely an indicator of a
serious problem with rogue groups. In some cases (such as the Football
War), there is evidence that concrete measures to disarm irregular forces
can help cement peace. But in many cases, the problem has not been
one of ‘‘involuntary defection’’ by rogue groups, but of the voluntary use
of irregular forces to carry out covert aggression. This problem, especially prominent in India and Pakistan and in the Middle East, has not
been effectively dealt with.
The effect of third parties on peace depends on their level of involvement. Outsiders often help mediate a cease-fire, as the United States did
for Israel and Egypt in 1970 to end the War of Attrition, or as Iran did
in Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1992. Third parties may also pressure
client states to stop fighting, as in the Sinai War and the Iran-Iraq War.
This level of involvement may help warring states reach a cease-fire to
begin with, but it does not help them keep it. If anything, cease-fires
reached with outside mediation appear to be more likely to break down
quickly (the coefficient is positive but not significant). Explicit guarantees, though not terribly frequent, are much more successful. There are
no cases of peace failing when an outside state has explicitly underwritten the cease-fire. Unlike in civil wars, such guarantees are not necessary33
(there are many cases of durable peace without them), but they clearly
help reduce the risk of another war.
Table 20.4 shows the effect of peacekeeping. The international community has sent monitors or armed peacekeepers to about two-thirds of
the interstate cease-fires in the post–World War II era. These efforts
have helped keep the peace, but the effectiveness of peacekeeping can
be easily undermined. The presence of monitors appears to lengthen the
duration of peace.34 However, the presence of armed peacekeepers does
not have a statistically significant effect. A look at peacekeeping’s record
suggests an important difference between missions deployed at the
time of the cease-fire, and those already in place before the war broke
out. More than half of peacekeeping’s failures (that is, cases where
peacekeepers were present and war resumed) were those of missions
deployed long before the cease-fire. In many cases these missions were
largely inactive and had been discredited by their earlier failures. The

33
34

Walter 2001.
This finding is not as strong when the Arab-Israeli conflict is controlled for. Deploying
a larger number of peacekeepers seems to reduce the risk of another war, but this effect is
not statistically significant (results not shown).

International Law and International Relations

536

table 20.4. Individual Peace Mechanisms (Weibull Estimates)

Variables
CONFIDENCE-BUILDING
MEASURES
SPECIFICITY

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

0.18
(2.11)

0.83

0.04***
(0.01)

0.96

Coefficient
(RSE)

Hazard
ratio

DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Ongoing mediation
Joint commission
FORMAL AGREEMENT

TIE

COST OF WAR

HISTORY OF CONFLICT

EXISTENCE AT STAKE

CONTIGUOUS

CHANGE IN RELATIVE
CAPABILITIES

Constant
Shape parameter p
N

3.57***
(0.33)
0.25
(0.28)
0.52***
(0.13)
3.24***
(0.57)
1.93***
0.28
1.53***
(0.09)
12.18***
(2.73)
1.08
(0.17)
757

35.36
0.78
1.69
25.49
6.89
4.63

1.84***
(0.49)
16.69***
(0.81)
0.69
(0.57)
2.24***
(0.28)
0.31*
(0.16)
0.68***
(0.18)
1.98***
(0.47)
1.16***
(0.27)
1.08***
(0.18)

6.27
0.000
0.50
9.35
0.73
1.97
7.21
3.20
2.94

10.49***
(2.95)
1.07
(0.27)
770

Subjects

47

48

Log likelihood

37.64

37.36

Note: Negative coefficients and hazard ratios ,1 indicate decrease in risk of another war
(increase in duration of peace). Positive coefficients and hazard ratios .1 indicate increase in
risk of another war (decrease in duration of peace).
RSE 5 robust standard errors.
*** p  .01.
** p  .05.
* p  .10. Two-tailed tests used.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

537

UN Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) had been deployed in 1964 to help
keep peace between Turkish and Greek Cypriots in an internal conflict.
It could do nothing to prevent military action by Turkey in 1974, nor
was its presence effective in maintaining a cease-fire in the midst of the
Turco-Cypriot War. Both the UN Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) in the Middle East and the UN Military Observer Group
(UNMOGIP) in Kashmir were effective in the early years of their
deployments, but after more bouts of fighting – in 1956 and especially 1967 in the Middle East, and in 1965 in Kashmir – these missions
were rendered useless. Both missions remain in place today, but are
inactive.
If one drops cases in which peacekeeping contingents were already
deployed before the war (for example, keeping the first Arab-Israeli
cease-fire when UNTSO was first established but dropping subsequent
cases in which UNTSO is the only peacekeeping mission), one can see
that new peacekeeping missions have been quite effective.35 Of course,
new peacekeeping missions are not foolproof, or there would never be
old missions discredited by their failure to keep peace. But there is a large
and statistically significant difference between cease-fires overseen by
a fresh set of international peacekeepers and those without the benefit of
peacekeeping.36
The jury is still out on the effectiveness of confidence-building measures, because they are relatively rare. The risk of another war appears
to be lower in cases where measures such as notification of troop rotations or hotlines between military commanders have been implemented
(see Table 20.4). But these measures have been employed in only a few
cases, making it is possible that this finding is merely an artifact of
the data.
I examined two types of dispute resolution between belligerents: that
provided by ongoing third-party mediation after a cease-fire has been
reached;37 and joint commissions made up of representatives from both
states in the war. The former is not an effective dispute resolution tool;
in fact it is associated with peace that is significantly more likely to
break down quickly. But joint commissions such as those set up after the
35

36

37

Note that because almost all of the omitted cases are wars that ended with a decisive
victory but were repeated, the hazard ratio for the variable tie is highly exaggerated.
This finding contradicts the conclusions of Diehl, Reifschneider, and Hensel 1996;
however, the results they report in Table 20.4 suggest that both active and operational
involvement by the UN reduce the risk of another dispute.
As opposed to mediation to reach a cease-fire, which was examined above.

538

International Law and International Relations

Korean War, between Ethiopia and Somalia in 1988, or between El
Salvador and Honduras in 1980, have been much more successful. The
history of the armistice commissions between Israel and its Arab
neighbors suggests that willingness to work within such a forum can
provide an important signal of intentions. These commissions worked
well in their early years to settle disputes over land use and fishing and
farming rights, as well as to handle small incidents between soldiers.
Conversely the breakdown of these regimes both signaled and contributed to increasing hostility on both sides.38
All else being equal, the more specific the cease-fire agreement, the
longer peace tends to last. More specific agreements also tend to implement other measures to keep peace, but the finding that specificity reduces the hazard of another war holds up even when these other measures
are controlled for. The most detailed agreements, such as the Korean
Armistice and the Israeli-Egyptian peace agreement, have been followed by lasting peace. Cases of medium detail (China-India, the Gulf
War, and the two Kashmir Wars, for example) have had mixed success,
and the much less detailed agreements (for example, the Six Day War
and the first Turco-Cypriot cease-fire) have tended to fail quickly. Demarcating the exact location of the cease-fire line put a halt to efforts on
both sides to push for slight advantages in the early days of each cease-fire
between India and Pakistan.39 Of course, deliberate attacks cannot be
stopped by specifying the location of the cease-fire line, but defining
compliance can clearly help prevent skirmishing as both sides try to
improve their positions.
Peace tends to last longer after formal agreements than after tacit or
unilaterally declared cease-fires, all else being equal, but the difference
is not significant statistically, nor terribly robust to different model specifications. Concern about international audience costs often plays a role
in states’ decisions about whether, when, and how to fight each other.
India and Pakistan, for example, have both tried hard not to appear as
the aggressor in their repeated wars, using proxy forces rather than regular troops to initiate hostilities.40 These two states have also fought in

38

39
40

For the history of these Military Armistice Commissions, see Azca´rate 1966; Khouri
1963; and Kinsolving 1967.
See UN document S/6710 and addenda, various dates 1965–66.
Pakistan sent Azad Kashmir forces across the cease-fire line in 1965, successfully laying
the blame for the war on India’s retaliation. India learned the lesson and sponsored the
Mukti Bahini insurgency in East Pakistan (Bangladesh) in 1971.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

539

places where their formal agreement left loopholes, as on the Siachen
Glacier in the early 1980s.41
However, formalizing a cease-fire may not be crucial for invoking
international audience costs. The general norm against aggression means
that costs may be paid even for breaking an informal cease-fire. The
international reaction has often been muted, either by great powers turning a blind eye for strategic reasons (especially during the Cold War), or
by a UN reluctant to threaten its impartiality by naming an aggressor.42
Formalism may, therefore, not be the best way to test for the role of
international audience costs.
In sum, arms control, third-party mediation, and attempts to control
irregular forces have not helped maintain peace, and may in fact be
associated with especially fragile peace. Confidence-building measures,
formalizing an agreement, and withdrawal of forces may help, but the
evidence to support their role is unclear. The most effective tools for
maintaining peace in the aftermath of war are demilitarized zones, explicit third-party guarantees, peacekeeping, joint commissions for dispute resolution, and making the cease-fire specific.
Political Settlement
Not surprisingly, political agreement on the issues over which the war
was fought leads to very durable peace (see Table 20.5). In fact, there are
no cases in the wars examined here in which both sides agreed explicitly
to a political settlement and war later resumed. But, as mentioned earlier, such settlement is quite rare in the post–World War II period. Only
three wars led to an explicit agreement on the basic dispute over which
the war was fought: the Yom Kippur War between Israel and Egypt; the
Iran-Iraq War, in which Iraq conceded the Shatt al’-Arab waterway to
secure its flank with the outbreak of the Gulf War; and the Gulf War
itself, in which Iraq formally renounced its claim to Kuwait when it
surrendered.43 Wars that end leaving the basic issues unsettled, as in

41

42

43

Lamb 1991, 325–26. The cease-fire line is not marked on the glacier, both because the
territory is so inhospitable, and because specifying a terminus would require agreement
on the disputed border with China.
A blatant example of this was the UN’s decision not to blame Pakistan for its role in
starting the 1965 war with India. For Secretary General U Thant’s rationale, see UN
document S/6651 (3 September 1965), 7.
In a few other cases, belligerents eventually settled their political conflict many years after
the war ended, as Israel and Jordan did in 1994.

International Law and International Relations

540

table 20.5. Political Settlement (Weibull Estimates)
Variables
POLITICAL SETTLEMENT

Imposed
Agreed
TIE

COST OF WAR

HISTORY OF CONFLICT

EXISTENCE AT STAKE

CONTIGUOUS

CHANGES IN RELATIVE
CAPABILITIES

Constant
Shape parameter p
N
Subjects
Log likelihood

Coefficient (RSE)
15.34***
(1.02)
15.57***
(0.99)
2.94***
(0.47)
0.66***
(0.18)
0.91***
(0.23)
1.55***
(0.45)
0.68*
(0.36)
0.81***
(0.24)
4.96**
(2.50)

Hazard ratio
0.000

0.000
18.89
0.52
2.49
4.73
1.97
2.25

0.72*
(0.14)
770
48
46.39

Note: Negative coefficients and hazard ratios ,1 indicate decrease in risk of another war
(increase in duration of peace). Positive coefficients and hazard ratios .1 indicate increase in
risk of another war (decrease in duration of peace).
RSE 5 robust standard errors.
*** p  .01.
** p  .05.
* p  .10. Two-tailed tests used.

the Korean Armistice, have been the norm rather than the exception.
Even if one includes settlements imposed unilaterally by a decisive victor
(but without official acceptance by the defeated side, as in the Falklands),
settlement is rather rare.44 This de facto category also appears to be quite
44

The basic issue of the war has been settled unilaterally in eight wars (nine dyads) in these
data: Russia-Hungary, China-India, Vietnam (North versus South), India and Pakistan in
1971, the second round of the Turco-Cypriot War, Uganda-Tanzania, the Falklands War,
and the second part of the Azeri-Armenian War.

Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace

541

stable. None of these imposed settlements have failed.45 Not surprisingly,
settling the underlying political issues is the best way to ensure peace. But
this advice is not particularly useful for most belligerents. When the
underlying issues remain disputed, it is the other mechanisms examined in
this study that can be used to maintain peace.
* * *

conclusion
Are some war-torn areas simply doomed to repeated conflict and warfare, or is there something that can be done to improve the chances for
peace? The findings of this article warrant optimism. Peace is hard to
maintain among deadly enemies, but mechanisms implemented in the
context of cease-fire agreements can help reduce the risk of another war.
Peace is precarious, but it is possible. Agreements are not merely scraps
of paper, their content affects whether peace lasts or war resumes.
The job of building peace is harder in some cases than in others. It is
more difficult when wars end in stalemates, when states’ previous history
is riddled with conflict, and when war can threaten the very existence of
one side. It seems to be harder for neighbors, but it is easier when states
have just fought a very deadly war, giving a greater incentive to avoid
further bloodshed.
But given these givens, states can act to improve the chances for peace.
I have focused on measures that: alter incentives by raising the cost of
an attack either physically or politically; reduce uncertainty by specifying
compliance, regulating activities that are likely to cause tension, providing credible signals of intention; or help prevent or manage accidents
from spiraling back to war. Do these measures help encourage durable
peace? I find that, in general, they do. All else being equal, peace lasts
longer when stronger agreements, implementing more of these measures, are in place. A counterargument suggests that strong agreements
are only associated with durable peace because they are implemented in
the easy cases. But the effects of agreements do not wash out when the
baseline prospects for peace are controlled for.
While some international relations scholars might be surprised to learn
that states can institute measures to overcome the obstacles to peace,
practitioners probably know this already. For them, the value of this
45

The imposed settlement between India and Pakistan in 1971 failed when they fought
again in 1999 after our point of censoring.

542

International Law and International Relations

research is in its lessons about which mechanisms work better than
others. Because these measures are often implemented in conjunction
with each other, one cannot reach conclusions about this that are as
strong as one might like. But the history of cease-fires over the past halfcentury suggests that creating buffer zones between opposing armies is
quite effective. Making the terms of the cease-fire, including the location
of the cease-fire line, as specific as possible is also important, as is setting
up joint commissions to discuss the inevitable conflicts and misunderstandings that arise in the aftermath of fighting. Confidence-building
measures, formal agreements, and withdrawal of forces do not hurt, but
the evidence that these measures help is less clear-cut.
For their part, outsiders interested in helping belligerents maintain
peace can improve its chances by providing an explicitly stated guarantee
of the cease-fire, and by deploying international monitors or troops as
peacekeepers. But third parties should be aware that mediation to reach
a cease-fire may be counterproductive in the long run. Peacekeeping
can easily become discredited. Leaving a mission in place after it has
failed does little to bolster the prospects for peace.
That states can implement measures to reduce the risk of another
war raises the question of whether they can do more to prevent war
breaking out in the first place. If demilitarized zones or peacekeeping
can help maintain peace after war, can they do so beforehand? Obviously
one cannot answer this question definitively without a wider study, but
at least in theory, the measures discussed above should be effective preemptively. The challenge is likely to be in convincing states to implement
them. It is normal, and therefore politically more acceptable, to take
measures to ensure peace in the aftermath of war. Giving up territory to
create a buffer zone or allowing international peacekeepers to infringe on
their sovereignty before hostilities break out, of course, is more difficult.
Whether or not the measures examined here can help prevent war
in the first place, I have shown that measures to reduce uncertainty,
alter incentives, and manage accidents can help maintain peace in the
hardest cases – among deadly enemies with strong incentives to take advantage of each other and in an atmosphere of deep mistrust. Maintaining peace is difficult, but even bitter foes can and do institute measures
to avoid another war. Creating a durable peace requires work, but it is
possible.

21
In the Shadow of Law or Power? Consensus-Based
Bargaining and Outcomes in the GATT/WTO
Richard H. Steinberg

* * *
International organizations use one or a combination of three types of
decision-making rules for most non-judicial action: ‘‘majoritarian’’ (decisions are taken by a majority vote of member states, and each member
has one vote); ‘‘weighted voting’’ (decisions are taken by a majority or
super-majority, with each state assigned votes or other procedural powers
in proportion to its population, financial contribution to the organization, or other factors); or ‘‘sovereign equality.’’ Organizations with these
latter rules – which are rooted in a notion of sovereign equality of states
derived from natural law theory and later adopted by positivists and
others – formally negate status, offer equal representation and voting
power in international organizations, and take decisions by consensus
or unanimity of the members.1 Organizations like the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Executive Committee of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the GATT/WTO,2 Common Market of the South,
Mercado Comun del Sur (MERCOSUR), North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and many specialized agencies of the United Nations
(UN), including the UN Development Program (UNDP) and the

1

2

* * *
See Vattel 1852; Dickinson 1920, 51–55, 95–99, 335; Kelson 1944, 209; and Riches
1940, 9–12.
GATT/ WTO refers to both the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and
its successor, the World Trade Organization (WTO).

543

544

International Law and International Relations

Executive Committee of the UN High Commission on Refugees
(UNHCR), usually have taken decisions only with the consensus or
unanimous support of member states. These organizations employ a host
of procedures (described below) that purport to respect the sovereign
equality of member states.
While sovereign equality decision-making rules are used widely in
international organizations, the operation of those rules – how states behave in practice under them and the consequences of that behavior – is
not well understood. Consensus decision making at the GATT/ WTO and
related procedural rules, which are based on the sovereign equality of
states, raise three related questions about the relationship between state
power and international law.
The first question is most striking. Why would powerful entities, like
the EC3 and the United States, support a consensus decision-making rule
in an organization like the GATT/ WTO, which generates hard law?
There have been recent efforts to redefine the distinction between hard
and soft law and to argue that soft law may be effective or might transform into hard law.4 But conventionally the distinction has turned on
whether or not the public international law in question is mandatory or
hortatory; most public international lawyers, realists, and positivists
consider soft law to be inconsequential.5 Realists have long argued that –
empirically – powerful countries permit majoritarianism only in organizations that are legally competent to produce only soft law, which poses
little risk that powerful states would be bound by legal undertakings they
might disfavor.6 In contrast, in hard law organizations, structural realists,
neoclassical realists, and behavioralists with realist sympathies have
suggested that there must be a direct relationship between power, voting
rules, and outcomes.7 Yet in organizations with consensus decisionmaking rules, weaker countries have formal power to block the legislation of important hard law that would reflect the will of powerful
countries. Structural realism would predict the collapse of organizations

3

4
5
6
7

EC is used to refer to the European Community, the European Economic Community,
or both. The European Economic Community was ‘‘seated’’ at GATT meetings from
about 1960. Jackson 1969, 102. With conclusion of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the
name changed from European Economic Community to European Community, which
then became a member of the WTO at its inception in 1995.
See, for example, Raustiala and Victor 1998; and Abbott and Snidal 2000.
See Hart 1961, 77–96; and Simma and Paulus 1999, 304.
See Riches 1940, 297, 894; Morgenthau 1978, 327; Zamora 1980; and Krasner 1983b.
See Krasner 1983a; and Morgenthau 1978, 325–28.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

545

with decision-making rules that can be used to stop powerful countries
from getting their way – or a change in those rules, which structural
realism treats as brittle.8 Some modified structural realists have tried to
explain exceptions to the expectation that decision-making rules would
reflect underlying power, using institutional or sociological arguments.9
However, mixing sociology and realism in this manner is theoretically
degenerative,10 and offers no prediction of when to expect rules to deviate from power or power to overtake institutional inertia.
The problem is solved partly by observing that the EC and the United
States have dominated bargaining and outcomes at the GATT/ WTO from
its early years,11 despite adherence to consensus decision-making. Yet
that solution is only partial, as it suggests two more questions: How
have the EC and the United States dominated GATT/ WTO outcomes
in the face of a consensus decision-making rule? And if such powerful
states dominate GATT/ WTO decision making, why have they bothered
to maintain rules based on the sovereign equality of states, such as the
consensus decision-making rule?
This article answers those questions, explaining how consensus decision making operates in practice in the GATT/ WTO legislative context12
and why the consensus rule has been maintained. First, the paper conceptualizes two modalities of bargaining – law-based and power-based –
synthesizing previous work on these frameworks, giving them context in
the GATT/ WTO, and providing empirical examples of both forms of
bargaining at the GATT/ WTO. When GATT/ WTO bargaining is lawbased, states take procedural rules seriously, attempting to build a consensus that is Pareto-improving, yielding market-opening contracts that
are roughly symmetrical. When GATT/ WTO bargaining is power-based,
states bring to bear instruments of power that are extrinsic to rules
(instruments based primarily on market size), invisibly weighting13 the
decision-making process and generating outcomes that are asymmetrical
and may not be Pareto-improving.
Second, the history of recent multilateral trade rounds is analyzed,
identifying stages of rounds in which GATT/ WTO legislative decision
8
9
10
11
12
13

Krasner 1999.
Krasner 1985, 29.
See Popper 1959; Kuhn 1962; and Lakatos 1970, 173–80.
Curzon and Curzon 1973.
The analysis does not attempt to explain bargaining in the judicial context.
Elizabeth McIntyre used this term in reference to U.S. power in the Havana Charter
negotiations, but she did not elaborate the concept. McIntyre 1954, 491.

546

International Law and International Relations

making has been primarily law-based and in which it has been primarily
power-based. Since at least as far back as the Dillon Round, trade rounds
have been launched through law-based bargaining that has yielded equitable, Pareto-improving contracts designating the topics to be addressed.
In contrast, to varying degrees, rounds have been concluded through
power-based bargaining that has yielded asymmetrical contracts favoring
the interests of powerful states. The agenda-setting process (the formulation of proposals that are difficult to amend14), which takes place between launch and conclusion, has been dominated by powerful states; the
extent of that domination has depended upon the extent to which powerful countries have planned to use their power to conclude the round.
Next, the paper explains why powerful countries have favored maintaining sovereign equality decision-making rules instead of adopting
a weighted voting system, and why they carried them forward into the
WTO. Analysis of the consensus decision-making process and interviews with GATT/ WTO negotiators show that the rules generate information on state preferences that makes it possible to formulate legislative
packages that favor the interests of powerful states, yet can be accepted
by all participating states and generally considered legitimate by them.
This article concludes that the GATT/ WTO consensus decisionmaking process is organized hypocrisy in the procedural context. Sociologists and political scientists have recently identified organized hypocrisy
as patterns of behavior or action that are decoupled from rules, norms,
scripts, or rituals that are maintained for external display.15 The procedural fictions of consensus and the sovereign equality of states have
served as an external display to domestic audiences to help legitimize
WTO outcomes. The raw use of power that concluded the Uruguay
Round may have exposed those fictions, jeopardizing the legitimacy of
GATT/ WTO outcomes and the decision-making rules, but weaker countries cannot impose an alternative rule. Sovereign equality decisionmaking rules persist at the WTO because invisible weighting assures that
legislative outcomes reflect underlying power, and the rules help generate
a valuable information flow to negotiators from powerful states. While
theory suggests several potential challenges to the persistence of these
patterns of bargaining and outcomes at the WTO, limits on transatlantic
power pose the most serious challenges.

14
15

See Tsebelis 1994; and Garrett and Tsebelis 1996.
See Brunsson 1989, 7, 168; March 1994, 197–98; Meyer et al. 1997; and Krasner 1999.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

547

bargaining and outcomes in the gatt/wto:
two modalities
Two meta-theoretical traditions help conceptualize bargaining and
outcomes in the GATT/ WTO: bargaining in the shadow of law and
bargaining in the shadow of power. Empirically, legislative bargaining at
the GATT/ WTO usually takes one or a combination of these two forms.

Bargaining in the Shadow of Law: Contracting for Consensus
at the GATT/ WTO
In a law-based approach, bargaining power in international organizations is derived from substantive and procedural legal endowments.
Decision-making rules determine voting or agenda-setting power, which
shapes outcomes.
* * *
Sovereign Equality Decision-Making Rules at the GATT/ WTO
To understand how law-based bargaining works in the GATT/ WTO
legislative context, it is crucial to know the procedural rules used there.
In all plenary meetings of sovereign equality organizations, including
the GATT/ WTO, diplomats fully respect the right of any member state
to: attend; intervene; make a motion; take initiatives (raise an issue);
introduce, withdraw, or reintroduce a proposal (a legal text for decision)
or amendment; and block the consensus or unanimous support required
for action.16 A consensus decision requires no manifested opposition to
a motion by any member present.17 If an empowered state representative
fails to object to (or reserve a position on, or accept with qualification –
for example, ad referendum) a draft at a formal meeting where it is
considered, that state may be subjected to an argument that it is estopped
by acquiescence from any subsequent objection to the draft.18
GATT decisions were not always taken by consensus. The GATT
1947 provided for voting: each contracting party had one vote, and no
nation or class of nations was given formally superior voting power. The
16
17
18

Schermers and Blokker 1995, 475–506.
M’bow 1978.
See Schwarzenberger 1957, 51, 95, 608–26; Bowett 1957; MacGibbon 1958, 476–80,
501–504, and Blackhurst 2001, 8.

548

International Law and International Relations

General Agreement required different majorities of the Contracting
Parties19 for approval of different types of actions. ***
But GATT/ WTO decision-making practice has differed from these
formal requirements. From 1948 to 1959, the GATT often used an informal version of consensus decision making instead of formal voting.
At least as early as 1953, and on several occasions thereafter, the chairman
took a sense of the meeting instead of resorting to a vote. Since 1959,
virtually all GATT/ WTO legislative decisions (except on accessions and
waivers) have been taken by consensus.20
The most common explanation for development of the consensus
practice at the GATT is rooted in the en masse accession of developing
countries beginning in the late 1950s. If a bloc of developing countries
had formed, constituting a super-majority of the Contracting Parties,
then that bloc might have been able to assume many of the legislative
functions of the organization; would surely have been able to assume all
of the administrative and judicial functions; and through its judicial
power might have been able to legislate new obligations, even if all
the industrialized countries stood together in opposition.21 In that context, U.S. policymakers considered alternative voting rules, but rejected
them for reasons ultimately related to the Cold War.22 *** By the late
1950s, many in the U.S. Congress and State Department were concerned
about the geopolitical alignment of developing countries, a concern that
became even more pronounced in the trade context after Soviet efforts to
strengthen the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
in the early 1960s. *** U.S. policymakers thought it would be impossible
to reach agreement on a weighted voting formula and expand the GATT
into a broad-based organization that could attract and retain developing
countries. *** Finally, since the late 1940s, some U.S. trade negotiators
had considered formal weighting unnecessary in light of influence over
voting that was rooted in the underlying power of the United States.23
When the WTO was established, consensus decision making was
not only retained, but was adopted as the formally preferred method of
19

20
21
22

23

In this article, Contracting Parties refers to governments, acting jointly or in their individual capacities, that were applying the provisions of the GATT between 1948 and 1994.
See Patterson and Patterson 1994; and Porges 1995.
See Jackson 1969, 123–28; Porges 1995, 2; and Schermers and Blokker 1995, 514.
This analysis is based on telephone interviews and conversations with Walter Hollis,
Washington, D.C., December 1985; Richard Matheison, Washington, D.C., November
1989; and corroborating authorities cited below.
Wilcox 1972, 195–97.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

549

decision making: Article IX of the Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization requires that only ‘‘where a decision cannot be arrived at
by consensus, the matter shall be decided by voting.’’ It defines consensus
the same way it had been defined in GATT practice since 1959: a decision
by consensus shall be deemed to have been taken on a matter submitted
for consideration if no signatory, present at the meeting where the decision is taken, formally objects to the proposed decision. If there were
recourse to voting in the WTO, Article IX provides that decisions would
be taken by majority, two-thirds, or three-fourths vote – depending on
the type of measure. But there has been no voting at the WTO.
Law-Based Bargaining at the GATT/ WTO
Deductions from consensus or unanimity decision-making rules suggest
that legislation will be Pareto-improving, obliging the ‘‘organ to seek a
formula acceptable to all,’’24 since legislation that would make any state
worse off would be blocked by that state. Moreover, the rules permit
weak countries to block positive-sum outcomes that they deem to have
an inequitable distribution of benefits. Experimental economics, and
legal applications of it, have suggested that individuals will often decline
acceptance of a positive-sum package if the benefits are distributed inequitably.25 Equity has been, of course, a persistent international theme,
particularly in postwar economic organizations, and developing countries have often blocked consensus in the GATT/ WTO on grounds that a
proposal did not sufficiently address their special and differential needs.
Bargaining and outcomes at the GATT/WTO have frequently assumed
this pattern. The consensus-based decision to launch the Kennedy Round
offers a simple example. In November 1961, as the Dillon Round was
ending, the Contracting Parties decided by consensus to establish a new
committee on tariff reductions and permit existing committees to continue addressing agriculture and less-developed country (LDC) preferences, respectively. Over the next year, however, no progress was made in
any of the committees, with the committee on LDC preferences deadlocked along North-South lines. In late 1962, the U.S. government shifted
its position on LDC preferences, declaring that a successful round
would require simultaneous negotiation of the topics being considered in
all three committees. On that basis, a consensus was reached to schedule
a Ministerial Meeting in early 1963. In May 1963, the Ministers launched
24
25

Riches 1940, 15.
See Davis and Holt 1993; and Korobkin 2000.

550

International Law and International Relations

the round, adopting by consensus a set of conclusions and recommendations embodying issues of interest to all Contracting Parties, and a
resolution to establish a Trade Negotiations Committee composed of
representatives of all participating countries.26 The round was launched
only after the developed countries agreed to include in the negotiations
issues that had the potential to make all countries – including developing
countries – better off.
Bargaining in the Shadow of Power: Invisible Weighting
at the GATT/ WTO
In contrast to the law-based approach, realists see most legislative
bargaining and outcomes in international organizations as a function of
interests and power.27 Diplomatic memoirs and works by lawyers who
have been employed in international organizations are replete with stories
of using state power to achieve desired outcomes from international
organizations.28 *** This work suggests that it is possible for powerful
states to simultaneously respect procedural rules and use various practices to escape the constraints on power apparently intrinsic to those rules.
Relative Market Size as an Underlying Source of Bargaining Power
at the GATT/WTO
While measuring power is notoriously difficult, in trade negotiations,
relative market size offers the best first approximation of bargaining
power. Most political scientists suggest that governments treat foreign
market opening (and associated increases in export opportunities) as
a domestic political benefit and domestic market opening as a cost.29
Hence, for example, the greater the export opportunities that can be
attained, the greater the domestic political benefit to the government of
the country attaining them. Market opening and closure have been
treated as the currency of trade negotiations in the postwar era.30
Whether trade bargaining takes the form of mutual promises of market opening, threats of market closure, or a combination of both, larger,
developed markets are better endowed than smaller markets in trade
26

27
28
29
30

Conclusions and Resolutions adopted on 21 May 1963, in General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, Basic Instruments and Selected Documents: 12th Supplement (1964), 36–48
(hereafter GATT BISD).
See Morgenthau 1940; Krasner 1983a,b; and Schachter 1999.
See Kennan 1972, 24; and Wilcox 1972, 195–97.
See Schattschneider 1935; Bauer, de Sola Pool, and Dexter 1963; and Putnam 1988.
See Hirchman 1945; Waltz 1970; and Krasner 1976.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

551

negotiations. The proportionate domestic economic and political impact
of a given absolute change in trade access varies inversely with the size of a
national economy. Larger national economies have better internal trade
possibilities than smaller national economies. A given volume of trade
liberalization (measured in dollar terms, for example) offers proportionately more welfare and net employment gain to smaller countries
than to larger ones. The political implication is that a given volume of
liberalization offers proportionately less domestic political benefit to the
government delivering it in the larger country. ***
Conversely, in negotiations entailing threats of trade closure, a threat
of losing a given volume of exports is a relatively less potent tactic when
used against a larger country than when used against a smaller one.
Hence, it is well established that developed economies with big markets
have great power in an open trading system by virtue of variance in the
relative opportunity costs of closure for trading partners.31
* * *
While market size is generally a good indicator of trade bargaining
power, the possibility of linkage across issue areas potentially limits its
usefulness. The value of market size as an approximation of trade
bargaining power is diminished to the extent that states are willing to
use non-trade sources of leverage. *** While the extent of linkage across
issue areas has been a subject of theoretical and empirical debate for
decades, regime theory suggests that, within a particular regime, bargaining can usually be best understood as confined to the particular issue area
addressed by the regime.32 Moreover, most empirical analyses of postwar
trade policy have suggested that potential military or financial leverage
has not been used in trade negotiations.33 ***
Using market size as a measure of trade bargaining power, the EC
and the United States are the world’s greatest powers. As rough indicators, consider that in 1994 (the year the Uruguay Round was closed) retained merchandise imports into the EC and the United States accounted
for approximately 40 percent of all retained merchandise imports in the
world,34 and that the EC-U.S. combined 1994 gross domestic product
(GDP) represented nearly half the world’s total GDP.35 By this measure,
31
32
33
34
35

Krasner 1976.
Haas 1980.
See Krasner 1976; Cohen 1985; and Hoekman 1989.
World Trade Organization 1995, 26, table II.3.
See Central Intelligence Agency 1995; and World Trade Organization 1995, 54, table III.30.

552

International Law and International Relations

the combined power of the EC and the United States is enormous in the
trade context. And to the extent that the EC and the United States can
cooperate, they wield great influence in multilateral trade negotiations.36
Power Tactics at the GATT/ WTO: Asymmetrical Contracting
and Coercion
It is useful to think of a range of power tactics that influence outcomes in
the GATT/WTO. First, powerful states may contract asymmetrically,
generating consensus support for outcomes that are skewed in their
favor. When aimed at an individual state, this contracting may be considered a ‘‘side-payment.’’ ***
Second, and more important than asymmetrical contracting for understanding GATT/ WTO bargaining and outcomes, weaker states may be
coerced by powerful states into consensus support of measures skewed in
their favor. By threatening to make weaker states worse off, coercion
may generate consensus for an outcome that makes powerful states better
off and weaker states worse off,37 or that is Pareto-improving but with
benefits distributed in favor of powerful states. ***
When aimed at a group of states – and in its most potent form –
coercion takes the form of a threat to exit38 the organization that is unable
to achieve consensus. In some cases, exit involves moving (or threatening to move) the issue to another organization where powerful countries are more likely to get their way. For example, in the early 1980s,
when the EC and the United States were unable to attain the required
majority in the World Intellectual Property Organization for broader
intellectual property protection, they moved the issue to the GATT,
where they were able to conclude the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) Agreement in 1994.39 In other cases,
the exit tactic may involve simply ignoring the deadlocked organization and creating a new organization that will become a source of future
legal benefit in the issue area. ***
In still another variant, the exit tactic involves withdrawing from the
deadlocked organization, stepping into anarchy, and reconstituting a new
organization under different terms. As shown below, this is the means by
which the EC and the United States closed the Uruguay Round.

36
37
38
39

Steinberg 1999.
Gruber 2001.
Hirschman 1970, 21–29.
Beier and Schricker 1989.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

553

trade rounds as cycles bounded by law-based and
power-based bargaining: launching, agenda setting,
and closing trade rounds
Trade negotiating rounds are the means by which the vast proportion
of GATT/WTO law has been legislated. Bargaining in the Tokyo and
Uruguay rounds is analyzed here to understand the extent to which
bargaining in trade rounds has been law- or power-based. These most
recent trade rounds are most likely to exemplify a representative range
of law- and power-based bargaining, largely because prior to 1970 the
GATT was dominated by an ‘‘anti-legal’’ culture that began to melt away
in the late 1960s and did not completely collapse until the early 1980s.40
As shown below, the extent to which negotiations in trade rounds have
been law- or power-based has depended on the stage of the round and
geostrategic context. Trade rounds may be analyzed in three overlapping
stages: launching, informal agenda setting, and closing. Generally, power
has been used more overtly as rounds have proceeded from launch to
conclusion, with the extent of coercion used in closing the Tokyo Round
constrained by the Cold War context.
Launching Trade Rounds through Law-Based Bargaining
The easiest way to launch a round has been to attain consensus on
a vague mandate for negotiation that includes virtually all initiatives
offered by any member. This approach has enabled all parties to believe
that the round could result in a Pareto-improving and equitable package
of outcomes, with domestic political liabilities from increased import
competition offset by foreign market opening. Negotiators typically haggle over alternative ways to frame issues and objectives in the mandate,
but – to reach consensus – the less prejudice in the mandate, the better. In
some rounds, there have been one or two issues that simply could not
appear in the mandate because of domestic political constraints. But
typically, a consensus on the draft negotiating mandate has been blocked
until virtually all topics of interest to members have been included, and
until the language has been sufficiently vague so as not to prejudice the
outcome of negotiations in a manner that any country might oppose.
From the perspective of powerful countries, invisible weighting could
be used at later stages. Moreover, only at later stages, after years of negotiations, will powerful countries have enough information on state
40

See Hudec 1988; and Price 1992.

554

International Law and International Relations

preferences to fashion a package of asymmetric outcomes that they can
be confident will be accepted by weaker countries. Hence, bargaining
to launch trade rounds has been law-based.
In preparing to launch each of the last five rounds, there has been
a North-South split over the pace, form, or structure of liberalization.
Each time, the developing countries have demanded a mandate for negotiations that would include special and differential treatment. Developed
countries have initially resisted including developing country initiatives
in the decision to launch. But the legal power of developing countries to
block a consensus has led to the inclusion of their initiatives in the consensus decisions to launch the Dillon, Kennedy, Tokyo, Uruguay, and
Doha rounds.
* * *
Informal Agenda Setting in the Shadow of Closure
Many have argued that in legislative settings where authority to set the
agenda (that is, formulate proposals that are difficult to amend) rests
with a formally specified agent, the process of agenda setting explains outcomes better than plenary voting power.41 In contrast, in organizations
based on sovereign equality, the agenda-setting function is performed informally, largely by the coordinated action of the major powers and a
secretariat that is strongly influenced by them.
The GATT/WTO agenda-setting process has three overlapping stages:
(1) carefully advancing and developing initiatives that broadly conceptualize a new area or form of regulation; (2) drafting and fine-tuning proposals
(namely, legal texts) that specify rules, principles, and procedures; and
(3) developing a package of proposals into a ‘‘final act’’ for approval upon
closing the round, which requires the major powers to match attainment
of their objectives with the power they are willing and able to use to
establish consensus. The agenda-setting process involves iteratively modifying proposals in minor ways (for example, providing a derogation, floor,
or phase-in),42 fulfilling unrelated or loosely related objectives of weaker
countries (that is, promising side-payments), and adjusting the package
that will constitute the final act. After being launched, the work of trade
rounds has taken place on a formal basis in proposal-specific working
41

42

See, for example, Baron and Ferejohn 1989; Garrett and Tsebelis 1996; and Moravcsik
1998, 67–77.
On use of these techniques in the EC, see Esty and Geradin 1997, 550–56.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

555

groups, negotiating committees, the Trade Negotiations Committee, the
GATT Council, special sessions of the Contracting Parties, and occasional
ministerials. But important work takes place on an informal basis in
caucuses, the most important of which are convened and orchestrated by
the major powers. The process has historically operated in the shadow of
the coercive power of the EC and the United States.
Most initiatives, proposals, and alternative packages that evolve
into documents presented for formal approval have usually been developed first in Brussels and Washington, discussed informally by the transatlantic powers, then in increasingly larger caucuses (for example, Quad
countries, G-7, OECD), and ultimately in the ‘‘Green Room.’’ Green
Room caucuses consist of twenty to thirty-five countries that are interested in the particular text being discussed and include the most senior
members of the secretariat, diplomats from the most powerful members
of the organization, and diplomats from a roughly representative subset
of the GATT/WTO’s membership. The agenda for most important formal meetings – round-launching ministerials, mid-term reviews, and
round-closing ministerials – has been set in Green Room caucuses that
usually take place in the weeks preceding and during those meetings.
The draft that emerges from the Green Room is presented to a formal plenary meeting of the GATT/ WTO members and is usually accepted by
consensus without amendment or with only minor amendments.43
The EC and the United States have dominated advancing initiatives
at the GATT/ WTO for at least forty years.44 Both weak and powerful
countries may advance initiatives, and they may be included in the
ministerial declaration that launches a round. But initiatives from weak
countries have a habit of dying: after launching the Tokyo and Uruguay
rounds, powerful countries often blocked a consensus to advance initiatives by weak countries when they were introduced for formal action
in the relevant negotiating committee.45 Moreover, weak countries are
43

44
45

See Winham 1989, 54; Blackhurst 1998; and WTO General Council, Chairman’s
Statement, Internal Transparency and the Effective Participation of Members, 17 July
2000.
Curzon and Curzon 1973.
For example, while the declarations that launched both the Tokyo and Uruguay rounds
called for ‘‘Tropical Products’’ liberalization and ‘‘special and differential treatment’’ for
developing countries, most developing country initiatives in these areas died in the
relevant negotiating groups, and the results in these areas disappointed developing
countries. Winham 1986. In the Uruguay Round, developing country initiatives and
proposals in the TRIPs negotiating group were ‘‘dead on arrival.’’ Interview with Emery
Simon, Washington, D.C., April 1994.

556

International Law and International Relations

usually excluded from the initial informal caucuses at which powerful
countries discuss with each other their important initiatives.46
Powerful countries have also dominated proposal development. Successful proposals have usually been drafted first in the capitals of powerful
countries – Brussels or Washington. They have then been discussed informally in caucuses of the major powers, and then in other caucuses
that include some less powerful countries.47 In the Tokyo and Uruguay
rounds, after the mid-term review, proposals and frameworks for negotiation that had been discussed informally in caucuses were then introduced into the formal working group meetings. *** Weaker countries
rarely tabled draft texts. Tabled texts typically contained unbracketed
language that all countries could accept and bracketed language representing alternative formulations favored by different groups of countries.
The bracketed language became the subject of detailed negotiation in
working groups and – ultimately – in the Green Room prior to and
during ministerials.
Simultaneous with initiative and proposal development, powerful
countries have considered the package of proposals that should be included in the final act for approval upon conclusion of a round. The package has changed depending largely on how the proposals were shaping
up and how much coercion was to be exercised by powerful countries.
The secretariat has usually facilitated this process and has often engaged directly in it by tabling proposals or a package as its own. The
secretariat’s bias in favor of great powers has been largely a result of who
staffs it and the shadow of power under which it works. ***
The End of the Day: Power-Based Bargaining in Closing Trade
Rounds – and the Cold War Context as a Constraint
In closing a round, the EC and the United States must employ invisible
weighting if they are to achieve an asymmetrical outcome. The decision
about how much power to use to facilitate a desired outcome in a particular issue area may be linked to interests in another issue area or to
geostrategic context. At the end of both the Tokyo and Uruguay rounds,
there was temptation to resort to exit. Both rounds included an

46

47

Winham 1986. This is typical in consensus-based organizations. Schermers and Blokker
1995, 501–502.
This process is typical in consensus-based organizations. See M’bow 1978; and
Schermers and Blokker 1995, 502.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

557

ambitious set of nearly completed agreements covering topics that went far
beyond the traditional tariff-cutting protocols of earlier years. Reaching
consensus on such an ambitious package would be difficult if only contracting could be used. Yet U.S. trade negotiators ultimately decided not
to exit in closing the Tokyo Round and to instead contract through lawbased bargaining. In the Uruguay Round, they made the opposite decision,
choosing to coerce by exiting the GATT and reconstituting the system.
The difference in choices is attributable ultimately to the Cold War context: U.S. policymakers, particularly in the Department of State, maintained a trade policy-security policy contextual linkage that constrained
the U.S. use of power in concluding the Tokyo Round;48 this linkage did
not operate in closing the Uruguay Round.
Closing the Tokyo Round
In the summer of 1978, as the Tokyo Round was about to close, [several
developing country leaders] argued that the GATT decision-making rules
endowed the developing countries with substantial leverage in determining the final shape of the Tokyo Round codes. They reasoned that the
codes being negotiated on dumping, subsidies, and customs valuation
could be considered interpretations of the GATT, which would therefore
require support by a consensus of the Contracting Parties. Moreover,
these developing countries offered an interpretation that the benefits of
those codes had to be provided to all GATT Contracting Parties on an
MFN basis, in accordance with GATT Article I, because they constituted interpretations of GATT Articles VI, XVI, and XXIII. Finally, the
GATT secretariat could not provide services to administer a code without a consensus of the Contracting Parties. In August 1978, the legal
department of the UNCTAD secretariat prepared a memorandum that
synthesized this legal analysis.49 ***
The Tokyo Round outcome reflected the success of this legal strategy:
the developing countries received all of the rights to the subsidies code
and the anti-dumping code, but they were not obligated to sign or

48

49

This argument is based on authorities cited below and interviews or conversations
in Washington, D.C., in either December 1985, November 1989–February 1990, or
July 2000, with Walter Hollis, Richard Matheison, Peter Murphy, and Doug Newkirk
(who worked at STR at the close of the Tokyo Round), and Chip Roh and Jerry Rosen
(who worked at the Department of State during that period).
Legal and Procedural Questions on the Conclusion of the MTN, Memorandum From the
UNCTAD Secretariat, 21 August 1978, UNCTAD Doc. MTN/CB.14.

558

International Law and International Relations

otherwise abide by the obligations contained in those agreements.50 The
developed countries had objected strenuously to what they characterized
as a ‘‘free ride’’ for the developing countries. But in a legal bind, the
developed countries acquiesced: the decision of the Contracting Parties
on administration of the subsidies code and the antidumping code
obtained the necessary consensus by reflecting the commitment to apply
them on an MFN basis.51 ***
U.S. trade negotiators were disturbed by these outcomes, which many
thought could have been avoided by the use of more potent bargaining
tactics. *** Some special Trade Representative (STR) negotiators wanted
to break the developing countries’ law-based leverage by threatening to
create an alternative preferential regime, proposing to move all or part of
the negotiations to the OECD and concluding the round as something
akin to a GATT-Plus package. In 1974, when the round was just beginning, the Atlantic Council had proposed establishment of a GATT-Plus
regime. The plan provided that the EC, the United States, and most industrialized countries would deepen trade liberalization among themselves, extending the benefits of the arrangements only to those willing
to undertake the obligations.52 The result would have been a two-tiered
global trade regime, which would quietly pressure the developing countries into liberalizing or otherwise facing the trade and investment
diversion associated with the more liberal GATT-Plus regime.53
The approach was controversial within the STR’s office, but the
U.S. State Department killed it. *** The State Department was strongly
opposed on the grounds that such an action risked hardening the
‘‘UNCTADization’’ of the GAIT, diplomatic spillovers into other
50

51

52
53

As of 1990, only thirteen of the more than seventy-five developing country Contracting
Parties to the GATT had accepted the subsidies code, and only fifteen had accepted the
anti-dumping code. Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Status of Acceptances of Protocols,
Agreements and Arrangements (as at 7 December 1990), GATT Doc. L/6453/Add. 8,
10 December 1990.
Action By the Contracting Parties on the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 28 November 1979, and Differential and More Favourable Treatment, Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing Countries, Decision of 28 November 1979, in GATT BSID 26th
Supplement, (1980), 201, 203–205. The United States Congress did not faithfully
implement the international commitments: U.S. law accorded the injury test in countervailing duties cases only to ‘‘countries under the [Subsidies Code] Agreement.’’ Tariff Act
of 1930, as amended by Section 101 of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979. As a result of
this contravention, the Executive Branch had to compensate several countries, including
India, with a package of commercial concessions.
Atlantic Council 1976.
Hufbauer 1989. See generally, Viner 1950.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

559

international organizations, and disturbance of diplomatic relations with
developing countries more broadly – all of which were undesirable in the
Cold War context in which the United States did not want to alienate
developing countries.54 *** With State Department opposition, it was
apparent to STR negotiators that the Trade Policy Committee could not
reach the consensus required to support a formal diplomatic threat
of exit.55
*** When it became apparent to the developing countries, in spring
1979, that the transatlantic powers would ultimately not exercise power to
force them on board, the Tokyo Round was closed with law-based
bargaining, yielding a final package that gave developing countries a free
ride on many agreements.
Closing the Uruguay Round: The Single Undertaking56
In contrast, by the time USTR negotiators settled on a plan for concluding the Uruguay Round, the Cold War had ended and the State Department had dropped its opposition to an overt use of power.
Since the beginning of the Uruguay Round negotiations, most developing countries had stated their intention not to sign on to the agreements on TRIPs, TRIMs, or the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS). U.S. negotiators considered developing country acceptance of
these agreements crucial to U.S. interests and to Congressional support
of a final package. Moreover, the EC and the United States were concerned that the developing countries would use their leverage under the
54

55

56

This analysis is consistent with arguments by others that U.S. Cold War policy sought to
avoid alienating developing countries and so led to their free-riding. See Krasner 1976;
and Gilpin 1981.
Without such a consensus, U.S. law on and practice in the interagency trade policy
process would have required a Presidential decision on the matter. See Section 242
of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended, 19 U.S.C 1801; amended by P.L. 93–
618; and 40 Fed. Reg. 18419, 28 April 1975. STR officials were unwilling to take the
matter to the President.
The analysis in this section is based on interviews or conversations with several
European, U.S., and GATT/ WTO Secretariat officials, including Julius Katz, Washington,
D.C., August–December 1990, and March 1995; Horst Krenzler, Los Angeles, September 1999; and Warren Lavorel, Washington, D.C., August–December 1990, and Geneva,
March 1995; and several U.S. government documents, including the following memoranda (on file with author): Memorandum to UR Negotiators and Coordinators,
Preliminary Legal Background on Ending the Uruguay Round, From USTR General
Counsel, 1 December 1989; Memorandum for Ambassador Warren Lavorel and
Ambassador Rufus Yerxa, A Single Protocol for Concluding the Round, From USTR
General Counsel and Deputy General Counsel, 20 July 1990; and Memorandum for
General Counsel’s Office, Options for Concluding the Round, 13 August 1990.

560

International Law and International Relations

consensus tradition of the GATT to block the secretariat from servicing
those agreements unless they were applied to both signatories and nonsignatories on an MFN basis.
In late spring of 1990, USTR negotiators decided to try to build a U.S.
government consensus on what some at USTR referred to internally as
‘‘the power play,’’ a tactic that would force the developing countries to
accept the obligations of all the Uruguay Round agreements. The State
Department supported the approach and, in October 1990, it was presented to EC negotiators, who agreed to back it. The plan was later to
be characterized as the single undertaking approach to closing the round.
Specifically, as embodied in the Uruguay Round Final Act, the Agreement Establishing the WTO contains ‘‘as integral parts’’ and ‘‘binding
on all Members’’: the GATT 1994; the GATS; the TRIPs Agreement; the
TRIMs Agreement; the Subsidies Agreement; the Anti-dumping Agreement; and every other Uruguay Round multilateral agreement. The
Agreement also states that the GATT 1994 ‘‘is legally distinct from the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, dated 30 October 1947 . . .’’
After joining the WTO (including the GATT 1994), the EC and the
United States withdrew from the GATT 1947 and thereby terminated
their GATT 1947 obligations (including its MFN guarantee) to countries
that did not accept the Final Act and join the WTO. The combined
legal/political effect of the Final Act and transatlantic withdrawal from
the GATT 1947 would be to ensure that most of the Uruguay Round
agreements had mass membership rather than a limited membership.
GATT Director-General Arthur Dunkel agreed to embed the plan in
the secretariat’s draft Final Act, which was issued in December 1991.
From that time forward, it remained in all negotiating drafts, enabling the
transatlantic partners to more completely dominate the agenda-setting
process in the Uruguay Round than in the Tokyo Round.

maintaining sovereign equality rules to generate
information about the interests of all states
As shown below, at the GATT/ WTO, powerful states have used invisible
weighting to define not only substantive rules, but also future decisionmaking rules. Powerful countries could choose either weighted voting or
sovereign equality rules to achieve asymmetric outcomes. But sovereign
equality rules are more likely than weighted voting to confer legitimacy on
those outcomes. Whether or not that legitimacy sticks, sovereign equality
rules are more useful than weighted voting in generating information that

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

561

is crucial to agenda setting dominated by powerful states, and that can lead
to a package acceptable to all states.
International legislative outcomes generated from a consensus-based
system may enjoy more legitimacy than those from a weighted voting
system.57 *** The legitimizing effect of sovereign equality rules on outcomes may be particularly pronounced for domestic audiences, as opposed
to trade negotiators who have witnessed invisible weighting first-hand.
The asymmetry of outcomes derived through invisible weighting
risks undermining the legitimacy of the outcomes and the decisionmaking rules. Yet developing countries do not determine what the
decision-making rules will be. Powerful states have preferred sovereign
equality rules to weighted voting in the GATT/ WTO because they provide incentives and opportunities for collecting the information necessary for a successful agenda-setting process. Several political scientists
have shown how international organization secretariats58 and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)59 may collect and transmit information that leads to efficiency in policymaking – or influence over it.60
Law scholars have shown how alternative deliberative procedures in
business organizations, among appellate judges, between litigants, and
in other organizations may be used to generate efficiency-enhancing
information.61 The task of a powerful country negotiator in GATT/ WTO
agenda setting is to develop a final act that will maximize fulfillment of
her country’s objectives, given the power that her country can use to attain consent from all states – a process that one WTO official has
described as ‘‘filling the boat to the brim, but not overloading it.’’62 The
agenda setters from powerful states must have good information about
each country’s preferences, the domestic politics behind those preferences, and risk tolerances – across all of the topics that might be covered –
to understand potential zones of agreement on a package acceptable to
all.63 To be most useful, the available information must be sincere and
not provided for strategic purposes (that is, not for purposes of yielding
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

See Zamora 1980; and Gold 1972, 201.
See Keohane 1983 and 1984.
Raustiala 1997.
See Haas 1989; and Bernauer 1995.
See Charny 1997; Bainbridge 1998; and Caminker 1999.
Telephone interview with Warren Lavorel, Geneva, March 1995.
Kenneth Arrow has argued that welfare-maximizing decision making by consensus
requires that each party have information about every other party’s preferences, whereas
authority decision making requires only that the decision maker have information
about every party’s preferences. Arrow 1974, 69.

562

International Law and International Relations

an outcome that would make the information provider better off than
if he or she had provided sincere information).64
The GATT/ WTO secretariat can at best transmit incomplete information for use in agenda setting. Generally, large, branching hierarchies
like the GATT/ WTO secretariat are unlikely to promote complete information generation and transmission.65 Moreover, the GATT/ WTO
secretariat usually lacks authority or political power to force a revelation
of state preferences, and states are often reluctant to rely on the secretariat to transmit information that may be crucial to explaining their
negotiating objectives and domestic political constraints, efforts aimed
at shaping perceptions of the bargaining zone. ***
Under the consensus rule, diplomats from powerful states have incentives to obtain accurate information on the preferences of weaker
states: they need to understand those preferences if they are to fashion
a substantive package and design legal-political maneuvers that will
lead to outcomes acceptable to all. In contrast, a weighted voting scheme
can, under certain circumstances, permit a handful of powerful states
to routinely determine outcomes without considering the interests of
weaker states. *** Some commentators have suggested that the Executive
Committee of the IMF adopted an informal consensus decision-making
rule because use of its formal weighted voting rules had led to a pattern
of exclusionary decision making, limited information generation, and
outcomes that disregarded weaker country interests.66
Conversely, under the consensus rule, diplomats from weaker states
have opportunities and incentives to provide information on preferences
to powerful states. If weaker states perceive that the information they
provide will be taken into account by the major powers in their agendasetting work, then weaker states have an incentive to offer detailed information about their preferences. Even if many weaker states perceive
that some of their preferences will be ignored, they would have difficulty sustaining a cooperative strategy of obstructing the informationgathering process because of wide variance in their interests across
issue areas, and defensive and offensive incentives to provide the information.67 A weak country that tries to resist the agenda-setting process
by withholding information on its preferences risks suffering a fait

64
65
66
67

See Charny 1997; and Caminker 1999.
Bainbridge 1998, 1036.
See M’bow 1978, 898; Schermers and Blokker 1995, 514; and Gold 1972, 195–200.
Stein 1993.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

563

accompli in the form of a final package that does not take into account its
interests; such a final package instead would take into account the
interests of other weak states that do provide information.
Moreover, in some circumstances, sovereign equality procedures
may help generate important information by forcing a revelation of sincere state preferences. Powerful countries offer initiatives, proposals,
amendments, or ‘‘non-papers’’ not only in the hope of hearing a favorable
response but also as a ‘‘probe’’ intended to engender an informative response. Whenever a probe is tabled, a state opposed to any part of it
must block consensus or that state risks an argument that it is estopped
by acquiescence from subsequently opposing the text.68 The consequences
of an argument of estoppel by acquiescence range from the persuasive to
the peremptory according to the circumstances.69 Hence, failure to block
consensus by a participating state may sometimes be a non-strategic transmission of information implying a sincere unwillingness to oppose it.
While consensus-blocking could be strategic, insincerity carries risks
of retributive behavior by other diplomats and loss of trust in future
deliberations.70 Moreover, the reliability and accuracy of diplomatic statements opposing a proposal made in Geneva are often investigated by the
intelligence services of powerful countries or by their diplomats stationed
in the capital of the country whose representative made the statement.
*** Thus state responses to specific initiatives, proposals, and amendments
tabled by powerful countries – the act of opposing or not opposing a
consensus, associated explanations, and offers of amendments – generate
information for refinement by agenda setters, part of a progressive and
iterative dynamic of information generation and proposal refinement.
* * *
Interviews with EC and U.S. diplomats who discussed alternative
decision-making rules for the WTO confirm that legitimacy and information generation for drafting agreements acceptable to all were important reasons they decided to maintain consensus decision making – indeed
to formalize it in the Agreement Establishing the WTO.71 ***
68
69
70
71

On estoppel by acquiescence, generally, see the discussion above corresponding to n. 31.
See MacGibbon 1958, 502; and Bowett 1957.
Charny 1997, 17.
Interviews or conversations with Ambassador Julius Katz, Washington, D.C., August–
December 1990 and March 1995; Horst Krenzler, Los Angeles, September 1999;
Ambassador Warren Lavorel, Washington, D.C., August–December 1990, and via
telephone to Geneva, March 1995; and others from the European Commission and USTR.

564

International Law and International Relations
* * *

conclusion: the organized hypocrisy of consensus
decision making – and its limits
GATT/ WTO decision-making rules based on the sovereign equality
of states are organized hypocrisy in the procedural context.72 The
transatlantic powers have simultaneously dominated GATT/ WTO
legislative bargaining outcomes and supported the consensus decisionmaking rule – and related rules – that are based on the sovereign equality
of states. The GATT/ WTO decision-making rules have allowed adherence to both the instrumental reality of asymmetrical power and the
logic of appropriateness of sovereign equality.73 Trade rounds may be
launched by law-based bargaining, but powerful states have dominated
agenda setting, and rounds have been concluded in the shadow of power –
to varying degrees. GATT/ WTO sovereign equality decision-making
rules and processes help generate crucial information for powerful states
to use in the invisible weighting process, and have helped legitimize
GATT/ WTO bargaining and outcomes for domestic audiences. Instead
of generating a pattern of Pareto-improving outcomes deemed equitable
by all states, GATT/ WTO sovereign equality decision-making rules may
be combined with invisible weighting to produce an asymmetric distribution of outcomes of trade rounds.
Distributive Consequences
In the Tokyo Round, transatlantic capacity combined with uncertainty
about whether the EC and the United States might opt for a preferential regime to yield an outcome that has been criticized as ignoring the
interests of developing countries74 – even though contextual issue-linkage
attributable to the Cold War dampened U.S. willingness to coerce
a more highly asymmetrical outcome. The raw use of power to close
the Uruguay Round via the single undertaking best exemplifies transatlantic domination of the GATT/ WTO, despite the sovereign equality
decision-making rules there. *** [It] is hard to argue that developing
countries uniformly enjoyed net domestic political benefits from the
72

73
74

Krasner has concluded that Westphalian sovereignty is organized hypocrisy. Krasner 1999.
Sovereign equality decision-making rules are corollaries of Westphalian sovereignty. See
Dickinson 1920, 335; Riches 1940, 9–12; Kelson 1944, 209; and Remec 1960, 56.
March and Olsen 1998.
See, for example, Winham 1986, 375–79, 387–88.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

565

nontariff agreements: they assumed new obligations in the TRIPs and
TRIMs agreements, the GATS, and the Understanding on Balance-ofPayments Provisions of the GATT 1994 – which most long opposed; they
gained nothing of significance from the revised subsidies and antidumping agreements; and they were required to assume the obligations
of those two agreements – in contrast to the Tokyo Round codes, which
had voluntary membership. And while the Textiles Agreement provides
for elimination of quotas on textiles and apparel, it is heavily back-loaded
and U.S. tariff peaks of around 15 per cent on those products were not
eliminated. Most developing countries got little and gave up a lot in the
Uruguay Round75 – yet they signed on.
* * *
This analysis does not suggest that developing countries have not
benefited from GATT/ WTO participation or from liberalization more
broadly. But as measured by their own objectives going into the last two
rounds, their complaints about the shortcomings of the outcomes of those
rounds, and informed by the analysis above, it is hard to conclude that
developing country negotiators are – on the whole – nearly as pleased as
their EC and U.S. counterparts with negotiating outcomes at the GATT/
WTO. And it appears that some developing country negotiators now
consider their countries worse off as a result of the Uruguay Round agreements than they were under the status quo ante.
Limits on the Organized Hypocrisy of Consensus Decision
Making at the GATT/ WTO
Is this pattern of bargaining and outcomes likely to be sustained over
time? The Doha Round was recently launched in a familiar pattern, and
the Doha Ministerial Declaration states that the negotiation will be
closed through a single undertaking. Yet theory suggests several potential
limits to invisible weighting at the WTO and to the organized hypocrisy
of sovereign equality decision making, more broadly.
Several possibilities suggested by theory seem unlikely to materialize in
the short run. One possibility is that the principle of sovereign equality
could take on a life of its own, precluding any political action that
contradicts it. Just as norms limit realist regimes theory,76 they could
75

76

See Ramakrishna 1998; Srinivasan 1998, 99–101; and Oloka-Onyango and Udagama
2000.
Krasner 1983b.

566

International Law and International Relations

limit invisible weighting. While theory suggests this possibility, processtracing, memoirs, interviews, and secondary histories of the GATT/ WTO
offer no evidence that normative considerations have thus far precluded
the eventual equilibration of outcomes with power that is explained by
invisible weighting.
Another possibility is that GATT Contracting Parties and WTO members have been willing to use sovereign equality rules – and have not deadlocked the organization – only because they have agreed implicitly to
move together in an embedded neoliberal77 direction. ***
Still another possibility is that even when powerful states identify
a common interest to pursue in negotiations with weaker countries,
cooperation problems between major powers could inhibit their effective use of power tactics and their domination of agenda setting, resulting in outcomes that do not reflect the common interests of powerful
states. Game theoretical analyses have suggested, from the earliest work
on the subject, that serious cooperation problems will exist in multi-party
negotiations.78 Failure to employ collaborative solutions to cooperation
problems (for example, sequencing or packaging issues) has at times
constrained the effective use of power tactics and agenda setting by the
transatlantic powers.79 But the packaging of topics in trade rounds as
the usual modus operandi of GATT/WTO legislation has generally
solved this cooperation problem.
Finally, substantial transaction costs of exit could constrain use of the
most potent forms of coercion.80 There was little financial cost in exiting
from the GATT and creating the WTO. While there may have been some
political costs, these seem relatively low. The organized hypocrisy heuristic suggests that exposure of the mismatch between behavior (on one
hand) and norms, scripts, or rituals (on the other) can engender disorder.
Such disorder may be characterized by: social or political tension between
those adversely affected by the behavior and those perpetrating it; a
breakdown or collapse in operation of the norms, scripts, or rituals; or
demands to reform them. Typically, these problems are remedied by new
norms, scripts, or rituals – these may simply constitute new fictions or
reinforce old ones.81

77
78
79
80
81

Ruggie 1983.
von Neumann and Morgenstern 1947, 220–37.
Steinberg 1999.
See generally, Hirschman 1970 on barriers to exit.
Brunsson 1989.

Bargaining in the GATT/WTO

567

Consistent with these expectations, since conclusion of the Uruguay
Round, developing country negotiators have organized to demand procedural reforms to ensure an inclusive and transparent negotiating
process. *** There have been ongoing, contentious discussions in the
WTO about increasing the internal transparency of its decision-making
process. *** But there is no reason to believe that the putative remedy –
a hortatory commitment to increased internal transparency – will fundamentally change agenda setting or invisible weighting at the WTO. Even
if developing countries understand exactly why and how the WTO
decision-making process leads to asymmetrical outcomes, the analysis
above shows there is little they can do about it.
The most plausible contemporary constraints on invisible weighting at
the WTO are related to the limits of transatlantic trade power. If power
continues to disperse in the WTO, invisible weighting by Brussels and
Washington will become more difficult. Expanded membership has been
diffusing power in the GATT/WTO. Moreover, many developing countries tried to cooperate with each other in closing the Tokyo Round, in
blocking the launch of the Uruguay Round, and in efforts to shape the
launch of the Doha Round. Sustained cooperation among developing
countries – which until now has proven difficult – could further empower
them. EC-U.S. cooperation could become insufficient to drive outcomes,
requiring the addition of new powers to the inner core of countries that
drive the organization, making cooperation within that inner core more
difficult. This would favor more law-based bargaining at the WTO –
dampening the flow of outcomes there, but making the pattern more
symmetric.
Simultaneously, many newer issues on the WTO agenda seem to require solutions based on institutional changes to national legal, economic,
and political systems that will not easily be realized and are exposing
the limits of raw trade bargaining power. The apparent incapacity of
most developing countries to implement the TRIPs agreement exemplifies
the problem. Adding investment, environmental regulation, and competition policy to the trade agenda will magnify the limits of power.
Finally, it is possible that geostrategic context will emerge again as
a constraint on the raw use of trade power by Europe and the United
States. Just as the Cold War dampened U.S. willingness to exit the GATT
or to formally threaten doing do, so may the war against terrorism – or
the next geostrategic imperative.

22
The Legalization of International
Monetary Affairs
Beth A. Simmons

Sovereign control over money is one of the most closely guarded national
prerogatives.1 Creating, valuating, and controlling the distribution of
national legal tender is viewed as an inherent right of a nation-state in the
modern period. Yet over the course of the twentieth century, international
rules of good monetary conduct have become ‘‘legalized’’ in the sense
developed in this volume. This historic shift took place after World War II
in an effort to bolster the confidence that had been shattered by the
interwar monetary experience.2 If the interwar years taught monetary
policymakers anything, it was that economic prosperity required credible
exchange-rate commitments, open markets, and nondiscriminatory economic arrangements. International legalization of monetary affairs was
a way to inspire private actors to once again trade and invest across
national borders.
*** The Bretton Woods institutions involved only three international
legal obligations regarding the conduct of monetary policy. The best known
of these was to establish and maintain a par value, an obligation that
was formally eliminated by the Second Amendment to the International
1
2

Cohen 1998.
See Eichengreen 1992; and Simmons 1994.

Thanks to William Clark and Brian Pollins, the editors of International Organization and this
special volume, and two anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments. I would like
to acknowledge the extremely helpful research assistance of Zachary Elkins and Conor
O’Dwyer, who assisted with data management and analysis; Becky Curry, who assisted
with the legal research; and Aaron Staines, Maria Vu, and Geoffrey Wong, who assisted with
data collection and entry. I would also like to thank the Archives of the International
Monetary Fund for access to documents. All errors remain my own.

568

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

569

Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Articles of Agreement in 1977. But two other
obligations remain: to keep one’s current account free from restrictions,
and to maintain a unified exchange-rate system. The first requires that if
a bill comes due for imports or an external interest payment, national
monetary authorities must make foreign exchange available to pay it.
The second proscribes exchange-rate systems that favor certain transactions or trade partners over others. IMF members can voluntarily declare
themselves bound by these rules (Article VIII status) or they can choose
to maintain, though not augment, the restrictions that were in place
when they joined the IMF (a form of grand-fathering under Article XIV).
My premise is that legalization of international monetary relations
helps governments make credible policy commitments to market actors.
As I will argue, the central mechanism encouraging compliance is the
desire to avoid reputational costs associated with reneging on a legal
obligation. As Kenneth Abbott and Duncan Snidal suggest in this volume, legalization is a tool that enhances credibility by increasing the costs
of reneging. The hard commitments enclosed at Bretton Woods were
thought to be necessary because the soft arrangements of the interwar
years had proved useless. Governments have used commitment to the rules
contained in the Articles of Agreement as a costly commitment to stable,
liberal external monetary policies. This does not mean that compliance
is perfect, but it is enhanced when other countries comply and when
governments have a strong reputation for respecting the rule of law. ***
* * *

the international monetary system before 1945:
national laws and international ‘‘understandings’’
The Nineteenth-Century Gold Standard
* * *
Although the gold standard certainly had a clear legal basis, there was
nothing international about the legal structure on which it rested. It was,
at most, a decentralized system of regulatory harmonization.3 To access
international capital and trade, other countries had an incentive to follow
Britain onto gold. So in 1871 the German Empire made gold its standard
(even though this required Germany to hold much more gold in reserve
3

See, for example, the description by the MacMillan Committee on Finance and Industry, Cmd. 3897, HMSO 1931, as reprinted in Eichengreen 1985, 185–99.

570

International Law and International Relations

than did Britain). Switzerland and Belgium followed in 1878. France
adopted the gold standard but restricted convertibility when the franc
was weak. The Austro-Hungarian gulden floated until the passage of
(what was purported to be) gold standard legislation in 1891. In 1900
the United States declared gold as the ‘‘standard unit of value,’’ which
put the country officially on the gold standard (though silver coins still
circulated). None of these national decisions involved the international
community in their making. ***
Nor was this system managed through international legal arrangements. Even if one does not accept the traditional description of balanceof-payments adjustment under the classical gold standard as fully
‘‘automatic,’’ its cooperative aspects knew no international legal guidelines. *** This decentralized system of harmonized national rules seemed to
provide a good degree of stability – at least for international traders and investors at the industrialized core of the system.4 As long as investors were
confident that the system would be maintained,5 there was little reason
to design an elaborate international legal structure for its maintenance.

The Interwar Years
World War I disrupted not only the economic relationships but also the
domestic political and social stability that underlay the confidence in the
gold standard.6 As a result, the interwar years were a ‘‘largely unsuccessful groping toward some form of organizational regulation of monetary
affairs.’’7 Increasingly, the major governments turned to negotiated
agreements that had the feel of ‘‘soft law’’ as described by Abbott and
Snidal. *** In 1922 the governments of the major European countries
met in Genoa to agree informally to the principles of a gold exchange
standard, which would economize on gold by encouraging smaller
financial centers to hold a portion of their reserves in foreign exchange
rather than gold. Although this agreement did in fact have an important
impact on the composition of reserves, it was at most a soft admonition to
economize gold holding. ***

4
5

6
7

Ford 1985.
Eichengreen writes extensively about the confidence that investors had in the prewar gold
standard. Eichengreen 1992.
Simmons 1994.
Dam 1982, 50.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

571

Virtually every important exchange-rate decision made in the interwar
years was made unilaterally. On 21 September the British government
implemented the Gold Standard (Amendment) Act of 1931, suspending
payments of gold against legal tender and officially leaving the gold standard. Even as multilateral negotiations were in progress, the Roosevelt
administration unilaterally imposed exchange controls and an export
embargo.8 Even when governments tried to coordinate their actions,
diplomatic declarations were chosen over legal commitments. The Gold
Bloc, formed in July 1933 among the governments of Belgium, France,
Switzerland, and the Netherlands to cooperate to defend existing parities, was a ‘‘soft’’ legal arrangement created by declaration and communique´, rather than a formal treaty. When France left the gold standard,
for domestic reasons leaders needed multilateral cover and sought it in
the form of the ‘‘Tripartite Agreement’’ of 1936. This agreement was the
loosest of arrangements, in which Britain, the United States, and France
issued separate declarations rather than sign a single document. Without
mentioning devaluation, France announced the ‘‘readjustment’’ of its currency, while promising, as far as possible, to minimize the disturbance of
such action on the international exchanges. ***
That governments tried at all to coordinate their monetary choices during this period had much to do with the growing incentives governments
faced after World War I to externalize their problems of economic adjustment. The international monetary system was still dependent on national
law, but the nature of the national rules had changed. Certainly governments
could no longer passively accept internal adjustments in the face of mounting political demands to manage the economy. In contrast to the nineteenth
century, during the 1930s a number of countries claimed to be on a ‘‘gold
standard’’ even though gold had little to do with the money supply and hence
held no implications for internal adjustment.9 Once the national rules no
longer commanded respect for internal adjustments, governments were
increasingly faced with the need for international rules to put limits on
external adjustments. Efforts to formalize international monetary relations
arose from the need for credible limits on external adjustment.

8

9

Presidential Proclamations 2039 (6 March 1933) and 2040 (9 March 1933); Executive
orders 6111 (20 April 1933) and 6260 (28 August 1933). Cited in Dam 1982, 47, 55.
In the United States it was illegal after 1933 (Exec. order 6260) for a resident to hold gold
coins or bullion. Sterilization funds in both the United States and Great Britain further
severed the relationship between gold flows and international monetary policy.

572

International Law and International Relations

the imf and international monetary law: toward
the formalization of ‘‘rules of good conduct’’
The legalization of international monetary relations burgeoned after
World War II.10 In rejecting the less formalized arrangements of the past
century and establishing for the first time a public international law of
money,11 negotiators from the United States and the United Kingdom
were consciously choosing an international legal framework to enhance
the system’s credibility. Moreover, the IMF was to be, among other
things, a fund, the purpose of which was to extend loans to members in
balance-of-payments trouble. *** The IMF was created by a multilateral
treaty arrangement, by which signatories agree to pay in subscriptions
in exchange for voting and drawing rights. *** With the entry into force
of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, money – like activity on the seas and
diplomatic relations among states – was drawn under the system of public
international law and became newly subject to its broader norms and
principles.12
Fixed Exchange Rates: The Rise and Fall of Legalization
The Articles of Agreement set forth two primary regulatory goals that
reflected lessons drawn from the interwar years: governments should be
obligated to peg exchange rates and to remove exchange controls and discriminatory practices that affected current transactions. *** Controls
that were once under the sovereign control of national governments now
had to be justified to the international community and were collectively
condoned only to the extent necessary ‘‘to carry out a purpose contributing
to general prosperity.’’13 In short, in the postwar monetary system, public
international law was to be used as it had been for decades in trade relations: to help facilitate the international exchange of goods and services
by providing for currency convertibility in open, free, and legal markets.
The international community thus explicitly recognized for the first
time that exchange rates were properly a matter of international concern.
To become a member of the IMF, a country had to communicate a ‘‘par
10
11

12

13

The expression ‘‘rules of good conduct’’ is used by Gold 1965, passim.
Gold 1984a, 801. A French plan was offered at the beginning of the postwar monetary
negotiations. Although it played no direct role, it did indicate the French preference
for agreement among the ‘‘principal nations’’ somewhat analogous to the Tripartite
Agreement. The French plan saw an international institution as optional. Dam 1982, 76.
Gold 1980, 5. Nonetheless, legal treatments of these obligations are surprisingly few.
See generally Denters 1996, 16–20.
From the White Plan. Horsefield and De Vries 1969, 3:64.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

573

value’’ for its currency by direct or indirect reference to gold. This might
involve minor negotiations with the IMF staff, but it basically established
par values very close to those prevailing just prior to membership.
Members then had an obligation to maintain that par value within the
margins prescribed in the articles.14 Members were required, without
exception, to consult with the IMF before making a change in their initial or subsequent par values; failing to do so constituted a breach of a
legal obligation. And although the IMF could not propose a change in a
member’s par value, by using its resources it could influence a member’s
decisions to adopt a particular par value. In short, ‘‘the authority over
exchange rates granted to the Fund by the original articles was unprecedented in international law.’’15
* * *
Remaining Monetary Obligations: Article VIII
Despite the softening of legal obligations with respect to the system of
par values, governments who are members of the IMF do retain two
important obligations in the conduct of their external monetary policy.
Both of these are contained in Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement,
which spells out the general obligations of members. These rules prohibit
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; they also prohibit multiple currency practices
without the approval of the IMF itself.16 Article VIII section 2(a) provides
that governments must make foreign exchange available for goods,
services, and invisibles.17 By agreeing to this standard, governments obligate themselves to make available to their citizens foreign exchange
to settle all legal international transactions (it remains up to the
14

15
16

17

Art IV, sec. 4. Furthermore, Art. IV, sec. 2 provided that ‘‘no member shall buy gold at a
price above par value plus the prescribed margin, or sell gold at a price below par value
minus the prescribed margin.’’ A central bank could not enter into any gold transaction
with another central bank other than at par without one or the other violating the articles.
Gold 1988, 48.
Art. VIII, sec. 2, para. (a), and sec. 3. Member states are, however, permitted to maintain
or impose exchange restrictions under certain conditions: (1) if they are necessary to
regulate international capital movements (art. VI, sec. 3); (2) with the approval of the
IMF (art. VIII, sec. 2 (a)); (3) if the IMF has declared a currency ‘‘scarce’’ (art. VII, sec. 3
(b)); and (4) if the exchange restrictions were effective at the time the state became
a member of the IMF (art. XIV, sec. 2).
The restriction applies only to payments and transfers for current international transactions. The IMF articles explicitly permit the regulation of international capital movements (Art. VI, sec. 3).

574

International Law and International Relations

government to determine which are legal).18 They also agree to refrain
from delaying, limiting, or imposing charges on currency transfers if
these have the effect of inhibiting or increasing the costs of making
payments.19 Interestingly, this provision appears to be the only part of
the Bretton Woods Agreements that constitutes an obligation of member
states toward their own residents.20
Multiple currency practices that establish different rates of exchange
have always been prohibited by the Articles of Agreement. Article VIII
section 3 creates a hard legal obligation to avoid such practices,21 which
were viewed as a threat to the original parity rule, potentially discriminatory, and always distortionary. As with the restrictions in section 2,
the IMF could, however, approve temporarily such practices, which can
serve to soften the proscription in the short run. Multiple currency practices were rampant after World War II: about a third of all the countries
involved in the Bretton Woods negotiations had multiple currency systems in place. As late as 1971, a major member, France, introduced a
multiple exchange-rate system. The United Kingdom also maintained
a separate investment rate as late as 1979.
Why were rules forbidding these practices considered necessary? For
two general reasons: Governments may want to support developmental objectives that favor certain kinds of imports over others based on
established state priorities.22 More often, however, governments use exchange controls and multiple currency practices as one among a variety
of methods to deal with balance-of-payments problems.23 For either
purpose, they may require exporters to surrender foreign currencies received in export sales to government authorities, at governmentally determined rates.24 In turn, importers are required to obtain foreign currency
from the governmental authority or authorized bank. Such systems

18

19
20
21

22

23
24

See Executive Board Decision 1034 (60/27), 1 June 1960, para. 1, Selected Decisions of
the International Monetary Fund and Selected Documents, 11:259 (Washington, D.C.:
IMF). See also Horsefield and de Vries 1969, 3:260.
Edwards 1985, 391 (see fn. 39 for original documentary sources); and Horn 1985, 295.
Boehlhoff and Baumanns 1989, 108.
Art. VIII, sec. 3 says: ‘‘No member shall engage in, or permit any of its fiscal agencies referred
to in Article V, Section 1 to engage in, discriminatory currency arrangements or multiple
currency practices . . . except as authorized under this agreement or approved by the Fund.’’
See, for example, India and Article VIII, 11 July 1955, S424, Transitional Arrangements,
Article VIII Country Studies (Washington, D.C.: IMF Archives).
See Edwards 1985, 381–32; and Gold 1988, 255.
Edwards 1985, 391. Surrender requirements are not prohibited, because surrender in
itself is not considered to be an impediment to the making of payments. Gold 1984a, 813.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

575

allow for foreign currency rationing or import discrimination in which
foreign currency is made available (or available at favorable rates) for
some goods or some transactions but not others.25
The IMF has always viewed such systems of control as dangerous
substitutes for economic adjustment and inhibitions to the development
of free foreign exchange markets. However, because many of the IMF’s
founding members could not immediately achieve full convertibility at
unified rates, Article VIII obligations are made voluntarily. Upon joining
the IMF, new members can avail themselves of ‘‘transitional’’ arrangements, under Article XIV, which in effect ‘‘grandfather’’ practices that
were in place on their accession to the Articles of Agreement.26 Even
so, Article XIV countries are expected to withdraw restrictions when
they are no longer needed for balance-of-payments reasons27 and are
required to consult annually with the IMF about retaining restrictions
inconsistent with Article VIII.28 In the course of these consultations the
IMF tries to persuade members gradually to move from ‘‘transitional’’
practices – foreign exchange rationing, multiple exchange rates, foreign
exchange licensing systems – to the IMF’s traditional approach: reduction of domestic inflation, comprehensive fiscal reform, devaluation if
necessary, and simplification of exchange restrictions to remove their tax
and subsidy effects. Once these fundamentals are in place the IMF usually
urges the Article XIV country to commit itself to Article VIII status.29
25

26

27
28
29

Edwards 1985,382. A very comprehensive system of exchange controls might prohibit
residents to transfer the state’s currency to nonresidents, except with the state’s permission on a case-by-case basis, or prohibit residents to hold foreign currencies except with
the state’s permission.
Art. XIV, sec. 2. An Art. XIV country can also adapt its restrictions without the need
for IMF approval. But an Art. XIV country cannot introduce new restrictions without approval, adapt multiple currency practices without IMF approval, nor maintain
restrictions that the member cannot justify as necessary for balance-of-payments reasons.
See Horsefield and De Vries 1969, 1:248–59.
Art. XIV, sec. 2.
Art. XIV, sec. 3.
Ideally, the IMF wants the removal of restrictions to coincide with the assumption of
Art. VIII obligations, though it has recognized that this might not always be possible and
that waiting for the complete removal of every last restriction would only serve to delay
the making of such a commitment. See Article VIII and Article XIV, memo prepared by
Irving S. Friedman, Exchange Restrictions Department, 24 May 1955, S424, Transitional
Arrangements, Art. VIII and XIV, September 1954–55, (IMF Archives). In a few cases,
developing countries that were not in an especially strong position to accept Art. VIII had
no restrictions in place, and the IMF urged them to go ahead and commit, since they had
nothing to ‘‘grandfather’’ under Art. XIV. See Haiti, memo from H. Merle Cochran to
Irving S. Friedman, 30 October 1953, C/Haiti/424.1, Trans. Arrange., Members’ Intent

576

International Law and International Relations

legal commitment: expectations and evidence
But why should a government voluntarily assume Article VIII obligations? And why should it continue to comply with them? After all, the
articles specify neither a time period nor a set of criteria for ending the
transitional period.30 And although the IMF encourages countries they
believe are in a position to do so to make an Article VIII commitment, the
IMF does not provide direct positive or negative incentives for doing
so.31 Nor does it directly ‘‘enforce’’ these obligations.32 It does publish
data on states’ policies from which one can infer compliance ***. The
executive board can also ‘‘approve’’ restrictions (or not) and has done so
as an accompaniment to adjustment programs it is supporting. But the
consequences of nonapproval are questionable, since the board does not
generally make its decisions public.33 The executive board can declare a
member ineligible to use the IMF’s resources if the member ‘‘fails to fulfill
any of its obligations’’ under the articles,34 and noncompliance sometimes
does interrupt drawings under standby and extended arrangements.35

30

31

32

33

34
35

to Use (IMF Archives); and Letter, Ivar Rooth, M.D., to Jose Garcia Ayber, Governor of
the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, 1 August 1953, C/Dominican Republic/
424.1, Trans. Arrange., Members’ Intent to Use (IMF Archives). These countries often
turn out to be long-term noncompliers.
Horsefield and De Vries 1969, 2:225. The IMF staff discussed on various occasions the
imposition of time limits for the removal of restrictions and the unification of exchange
rates, but rejected them as impractical. Article VIII and Article XIV, memo prepared by
Irving S. Friedman, 24 May 1955, S 424, Trans. Arrange. (IMF Archives). There were also
debates over the IMF’s legal authority to declare an end to the transitional period.
Furthermore, there were debates in the early period about exactly what ‘‘transitional’’
referred to. Extract, Executive Board Informal Session 54/2, 19 November 1954, S424,
Trans. Arrange. (IMF Archives).
However, sometimes countries in fairly tenuous balance-of-payments positions who were
willing to accept Art. VIII obligations were provided standby arrangements. For example,
see Costa Rica (1965), Executive Board Minutes, EBM/65/7, 29 January 1965, C/Costa
Rica/424.1, Trans. Arrange., Members’ Intent to Use (IMF Archives).
In 1948, the executive board explicitly disapproved France’s multiple exchange-rate
practice and declared France ineligible to use IMF resources, invoking Art. IV, sec. 6 sanctions. The sanction failed to induce France to adopt a unitary rate. The use of sanctions
was perceived as a failure and never invoked again. Dam 1982, 132.
Although the board is not barred from publishing reports that communicate the board’s
views, doing so requires a two-thirds majority of the total voting power to make this
decision. Gold 1979, 153.
Art XV, sec. 2 (a).
According to Gold, ‘‘All standby arrangements include a uniform term on measures
that directly or indirectly affect exchange rates. Under this term a member is precluded
from making purchases under an arrangement if at any time during the period of
the arrangement the member: ‘i. imposes [or intensifies] restrictions on payments and
transfers for current international transactions, or ii. introduces [or modifies] multiple

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

577

But, in fact, the IMF has used these formal remedies very sparingly. Noncompliers rarely have to worry about retaliation directly from the IMF,
since members that vote for some kind of punishment may be concerned
about drawing a retaliatory vote in the future. The IMF is much more likely
to use persuasion than to apply a remedy for continued noncompliance.36
* * *
Governments therefore face something of a dilemma: there are costs
to being the first to liberalize (including the possibility of direct balanceof-payments pressures), but there are also costs to lagging too far behind international or regional norms. Governments have keenly felt this
dilemma in formulating their policies regarding Article VIII. The major
Western European countries, for example, assumed Article VIII obligations in unison, since ‘‘None of the six countries wanted to move in advance
of the other, and all of them preferred to come under Article VIII at the
same time as the United Kingdom.’’37 A similar decision was made by the
African franc zone countries three and a half decades later. *** In
discussions of the timing of Article VIII acceptance with the IMF, Peru’s
prime minister ‘‘agreed Peru should not jump out ahead of the others,
but . . . definitely does not want to ‘miss the boat.’’’38 These concerns are

36
37

38

currency practices, or iii. concludes bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent
with Art. VIII, or iv. imposes [or intensifies] import restrictions for balance of payments
reasons.’ ’’ Gold 1988, 466.
Gold 1979, 185.
Implementation of Article XIV and Article VIII Decision, minutes of staff visit to the United
Kingdom, 22 July 1960, S424, Trans. Arrange., Move to Article VIII Mission, minutes of
meetings (IMF Archives). The IMF archives contain ample evidence that no European
power wanted to pay the potential costs of being the first mover, yet none wanted to lag
a decision by other countries in the region. Thus, ‘‘The French policy with regards to
restrictions depends on the policy followed by other European countries, especially Great
Britain. It might even be said in large measure it is conditioned by that policy.’’ F. A. G.
Keesing, 1 July 1955. S424, Trans. Arrange., Art. VIII Country Studies (IMF Archives). For
a similar position by the Netherlands, see Netherlands and Article VIII. 23 June 1955,
S424, Trans. Arrange., Art. VIII Country Studies (IMF Archives). On the United Kingdom’s
unwillingness to move alone, see memo from Rooth to E. M. Bernstein, 20 May 1955,
S424, Trans. Arrange., Art. VIII and XIV, Sept. 1954–55 (IMF Archives). On the incentives
for a general snowball effect within Europe, see memo from F. A. G. Keesing, 13 May 1955,
S424, Trans. Arrange., Art. VIII and XIV, 1954–55 (IMFArchives).
Memo from Jorge del Canto to Per Jacobsson, IMF Managing Director, 23 September 1960,
C/Peru/ 424.1, Trans. Arrange., Members’ Intent to Use (IMF Archives). Peru was basically
free from all restrictions in 1960, and IMF staff members wondered whether they should be
encouraged to assume Art. VIII obligations as soon as possible or wait and go with the
Europeans. In a hand written note in the margins, Per Jacobsson wrote, ‘‘No. It would not
profit Peru to move first – more advantageous to be ‘drawn by movement’ with others.’’
Memo from Jorge del Canto to Per Jacobsson, 17 May I960, C/Peru/424.1 (IMF Archives).

578

International Law and International Relations

understandable if legal commitment is viewed as a way to reassure markets
in a competitive economic environment. Although there may be few
incentives to liberalize first, governments need to be cognizant of the signal
they may be sending by refusing to commit, especially when other countries with whom they might compete for capital or trade have done so.
If a legal commitment to Article VIII is a way to improve access to
capital and trade by in effect raising the costs of interfering in foreign
exchange markets, then we should expect commitment to be influenced
by two factors: (1) a basic ability to comply (which is necessary for a
credible commitment), and (2) the commitment decisions of other countries (which avoids the costs of being the first to move and reduces the
costs of lagging).
We should also consider a set of plausible control variables that could
reveal a spurious correlation with these hypothesized relationships. I am
not suggesting that a credible commitment is the only reason a government
would commit to Article VIII but investigating whether it stands up to
a range of plausible alternatives. The first is a straightforward argument
based on domestic demands: commitment is likely to be a function of
domestic policy demands, just like any other aspect of foreign economic
policymaking.39 *** Article VIII provides a right of access to foreign
exchange for residents and nonresidents, and demands for such a right are
likely to be greater in countries where trade is an important part of the
national economy. ***
The IMF staff, in their discussions of who was ready to commit, clearly
recognized the incentives that trade dependence created. Indonesia was
deemed unlikely to commit, for example, because ‘‘The restrictive system is
somewhat peripheral to the broad economic issues in which the public are
interested: foreign trade is only 6% of GDP. And non-nationals control
the major industries’’ (jute and tea).40 On the other hand, when Guyana
made the Article VIII commitment, the executive board noted explicitly that ‘‘Guyana was one of those very few developing countries in the
world whose imports and exports, taken separately, were larger than
50 per cent of GNP, and this necessarily meant that the country was
39

40

The literature linking foreign economic policymaking to domestic political demands is
vast. Most of this work concentrates on demands for trade protection. See, for example,
Aggarwal, Keohane, and Yoffie 1987; Alt et al. 1996; Destler and Odell 1987; Goodman,
Spar, and Yoffie 1996; McKeown 1984; Milner 1988; and Rogowski 1989. For works on
financial and monetary policy, see Simmons 1994; and Frieden 1991.
Indonesia and Article VIII, 14 July 1955, S424, Trans. Arrange., Art. VIII Country
Studies (IMF Archives).

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

579

highly vulnerable to swings both in capital and in trading magnitudes.’’
Trade dependence made Guyana a good candidate for Article VIII but also
implied a possible need for IMF assistance should liberalization prove
destabilizing. A standby arrangement was considered simultaneously.41
Furthermore, we might expect that the demand for guaranteed foreign
exchange access is most likely to be addressed by a democratic regime.
The political organization around this issue area is likely to be that of
civil society versus the state: on the one hand, it is difficult to conceive
of a private interest that would organize to actively oppose free access
to foreign exchange. On the other hand, the concentrated rents go to
the government, as the dispenser of limited access to hard currency. If
one of the primary characteristics of democracy is the extent to which it
empowers civil demands vis-a`-vis the state, and if it is also true that these
demands are likely to favor those who want free access to foreign exchange, then we should expect democratic governance to be positively
associated with the acceptance of Article VIII.
It is also important to control for the institutional incentives
provided by the IMF for those who commit: An early inducement for
countries to choose Article VIII status was the fact that multilateral
surveillance applied only to Article XIV countries until the Second
Amendment (revisions to Article IV) extended mandatory surveillance
to the entire IMF membership.42 Prior to 1977, governments willing
to announce acceptance of Article VIII obligations could actually avoid
multilateral surveillance.43 *** Thus until 1977, members faced a perverse incentive to accept Article VIII obligations: the commitment gave
them the ability to avoid discriminatory and potentially humiliating
surveillance and formal board review. We can hypothesize that the
acceptance rate was therefore higher, all else being equal, before 1977
than after.
Finally, controlling for time is appropriate in this analysis. One important reason is that countries may have been reluctant to commit to
Article VIII in the early years of the IMF because it was unclear just how
the executive board would interpret the obligation. Countries clearly
did not want to commit and then be surprised that the executive board
41

42
43

Guyana – Acceptance of Obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, Initial Par
Value, and Stand-by Arrangement, 13 February 1967, EMB/67/10, C/Guyana/424.1,
Trans. Arrange., Members’ Intent to Use (IMF Archives).
James 1995, 773, 775.
Gold 1983, 474–75. Consultations with Art. VIII countries were established in 1960
but were completely voluntary. Horsefield and De Vries 1969, 2:246–47.

580

International Law and International Relations

considered them in breach of their obligation.44 As time went on, this
kind of uncertainty could be expected to wane through approval
decisions and executive board clarification.
* * *
Before proceeding to more complicated analyses, it is useful to make a
visual inspection of the data. The data set used is a panel of 138 countries.
The only criterion for their inclusion was membership in the IMF by
1980. Of these countries, we have time varying and case varying data for
110 countries that have chosen Article VIII status since 1966. Using
yearly observations for these countries, it is useful to construct a KaplanMeier ‘‘survival function’’ that describes the period of transition prior
to making an Article VIII commitment (see Figure 22.1).45
One fact becomes obvious from this visual representation of the data:
the ‘‘transitional’’ regime could in fact last a long period of time for a number of countries. The Kaplan-Meier function estimates about a 25 percent chance of accepting Article VIII status in the first twenty-four years
of IMF membership, a 50 percent chance within thirty-five years, and
about a 75 percent chance after fifty years. Clearly, many countries have
been in no rush to commit legally to keeping their current account free
from restrictions.
What affects the rate at which governments make the commitment?
Table 22.1 presents the findings of the Cox proportional hazard estimation for a combination of variables discussed earlier. (Note that ratios of
more than 1 indicate an increase in the rate of Article VIII acceptance,
and ratios of less than 1 indicate a reduction in the rate of acceptance. Thus
the null hypothesis is that the hazard ratio is not significantly different
from 1.) Consider first the ability to comply, which I argue is essential
44

45

For example, the United Kingdom did not want the stigma of a board decision that they
maintained an illegal multiple currency practice as a result of what the United Kingdom
considered a legitimate way to control capital movements. Implementation of Article
XIV and Article VIII Decision, minutes of staff visit to the United Kingdom, 27 July 1960,
S424, Trans. Arrange., Move to Art. VIII Mission (IMF Archives). Uncertainty over
board interpretation inhibited early commitment. Generally, see Policy Aspects of the
Article VIII and Article XIV Problem, 21 October 1954, S424, Trans. Arrange., Art.
VIII and XIV, 1954–55 (IMF Archives).
The literature usually terms the event of interest a ‘‘failure’’ and the time elapsed until its
occurrence as ‘‘survival’’ regardless of the substantive problem modeled. Proponents of
international openness and free markets would in this case view ‘‘survival’’ analysis as
‘‘transition’’ analysis, and an Art. VIII commitment as a ‘‘success’’; those who favor closer
government management of markets might agree that the customary appellations are in
fact more apt.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

581

1.00

S(t)

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
0

40
20
Number of years since joining the IMF

60

Note: The Kaplan-Meier estimator for maintaining Article XIV status beyond
time t is the product of the probability of maintaining this status in time t and
the perceding periods:
t
S(t) = ∏{(nj − dj)/nj}
j = t0
where n represents those cases that neither accepted Article VIII status nor
were censored, and d represents the number of acceptances during the time
period.
Country-years
at risk
Total

3,125

Incidence rate
.01999

Number
of countries
110

Survival time
25%

50%

75%

24

35

50

figure 22.1. The Kaplan-Meier survival function: Duration of Article XIV
status over time.

for a credible commitment. My expectation is that countries are more
unlikely to make Article VIII obligations when their payments are volatile
and they tend toward deficit. In the models developed here, balanceof-payments levels (the average balance of payments for the period as a
whole) are interacted with balance-of-payments volatility.46 This
46

Reserve levels and volatility, as well as terms of trade volatility, were also analyzed, but
because the results were insignificant they are not reported here.

International Law and International Relations

582

table 22.1. Influences on the Rate of Article VIII Acceptance
Rate of Article VIII acceptance (hazard ratios)

Average balance of
payments
Balance-of-payments
volatility
Balance-of-payments
(volatility*mean)
Universality
Regional norm
Surveillance
Openness
Democracy
Year
N
Time ‘‘at risk’’
Log likelihood
v2
Prob. . v2

Model 1

Model 2

—

—

—

—

—

—

1.073***
(.015)
1.030***
(.005)
.608
(.289)
1.009***
(.003)
—
—
1,988
2,517.97
182.45
132.12
0.00

1.330***
(.092)
1.043***
(.009)
.047***
(.042)
1.015***
(.003)
1.078*
(.050)
—
1,757
2,296.98
93.39
75.63
0.00

Model 3
1.364**
(.145)
.390**
(.170)
.887**
(.035)
1.385***
(.111)
1.045***
(.010)
.041***
(.047)
1.018***
(.004)
1.081*
(.044)
—
1,754
2,294.98
90.15
66.09
0.00

Model 4
1.352**
(.180)
.400*
(.205)
.891**
(.046)
1.553***
(.386)
1.040***
(.010)
.061**
(.087)
1.018***
(.005)
1.079*
(.044)
.904
(.199)
1,754
2,294.98
89.96
74.76
0.00

Note: Table shows estimated hazard rates using a Cox proportionate hazard model with
time varying covariates. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*** p . jZj ¼ .01.
** p . jZj ¼ .05.
* p . jZj ¼ .10.

specification is meant to distinguish volatility effects conditional on
whether the balance-of-payments position is relatively strong or weak.
The results displayed in Table 22.1 show that, as anticipated, balance-ofpayments volatility reduces the proportional hazard rate substantially. In
model 3, it reduces the rate by (1  .390), or .610, when mean deficits are
equal to zero. Substantively, volatility is very likely to reduce the rate at
which countries accept Article VIII obligations. Also as expected,
countries that have better balance-of-payments positions are more likely
to accept Article VIII obligations (36.4 percent more likely for every

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

583

percentage point of balance of payments as a proportion of gross
domestic product, GDP, according to model 3). Interestingly, the negative
effects of volatility may be slightly greater in countries with better
payment positions on average, as indicated by the statistically significant
but substantively small impact of the interaction term. These findings
about the balance of payments support the hypothesis that countries that
are more capable of compliance are more likely to commit. The
commitment is, in turn, more likely to be credible.
The next two variables, ‘‘universality’’ and ‘‘regional norm,’’ are meant
to test the proposition that taking on an obligation is likely to be contingent on similar actions by others. ‘‘Universality’’ is the proportion of all
IMF members who have accepted Article VIII status, and ‘‘regional norm’’
is the proportion of countries within each subregion (as defined by the
World Bank) that have done so. (All variable measures and sources are
discussed in the data appendix.) Both of these variables have a large
and positive influence on the acceptance rate. According to model 3, for
example, every 1 percent increase in the proportion of IMF members
accepting Article VIII increases the likelihood of acceptance by 38.5
percent. Similarly, a 1 percent increase in the regional proportion of
Article VIII adherents increases a country’s likelihood of acceptance by
4.1 percent. This translates into a 49 percent increase for every 10 percent increase in regional accession.47 Clearly, as the number of countries
who accept Article VIII increases, there is a greatly increased chance that
an uncommitted government will do so. Note that this impact is
significant even if we control for time (‘‘year’’ in model 4). We can be
fairly confident, then, that the universality and regional norms variables
evaluated here do not simply reflect the fact that adherents increase over
time. What most influences the acceptance rate is not time, but the
proportion of adherents. This finding is consistent with the incentives of
the competitive economic environment in which governments declare
their legal adherence to Article VIII.
Domestic political demands that flow from trade-openness also have
an important impact on the acceptance rate. Openness to the international trade system raises the proportional hazard rate significantly.
According to model 3, every one point increase in imports plus exports as a proportion of GDP increases the likelihood of Article VIII
acceptance by 1.8 percent. This could account for a 67 percent difference
in acceptance probability for countries with trade profiles as different
47

Which is calculated by raising the estimated hazard ratio to the tenth power.

584

International Law and International Relations

as, say, Malaysia (imports plus exports totaling approximately 80 percent of GDP for the period under consideration) and the Philippines
(where the corresponding figure is about 50 percent).48 Certainly, the
demands of importers and exporters have much to do with the government’s willingness to commit. Interestingly, whether or not a country
was democratic only marginally affected the decision, if at all. In the
improbable event that a country transformed itself from a complete nondemocracy to a highly democratic society, the possible impact on the
probability of accepting Article VIII would only be about 19 percent.
Our confidence in this effect barely reaches standard levels of significance, however.49
There is also evidence that institutional incentives have made a big
difference in Article VIII acceptance. ‘‘Surveillance’’ here is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of zero prior to 1977 and 1 thereafter. Once
surveillance has been extended to all countries – not just those availing
themselves of the Article XIV transitional regime – the impact has been to
reduce drastically the probability of accepting Article VIII, as we expected,
though our confidence in this result is reduced somewhat by the exclusion
of democracy as an independent explanation. The hazard ratio indicates
that once the surveillance advantage of Article VIII states was removed,
countries were anywhere from 40 percent to as much as 96 percent less
likely to accept Article VIII status, other conditions held constant. The end
of discriminatory surveillance seems to have mattered greatly to governments’ willingness to commit. On the other hand, the simple passage of
time had little effect. This could be because the uncertainty regarding
obligations that motivated the inclusion of this variable was highly
concentrated in the very earliest years of the IMF. There is little reason
to believe that time itself accounts for changes in the rate of commitment.
The evidence suggests that governments are more likely to commit to
Article VIII status when the commitment is credible and when other
countries, especially countries in their own region, have done so as well.
Although other factors influence the decision to commit, these results
are consistent with the use of legal commitments as a signal to markets
of a serious intent to maintain open and nondiscriminatory foreign exchange markets.

48

49

Calculated in this case by raising the estimated hazard ratio to the twenty-ninth
power.
Subtracting the polity scores on autocracy from those on democracy, yielding a scale
from 10 to 10, does not significantly alter this general conclusion.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

585

who complies? explaining the compliance decision
* * *
If legalization is an attempt to make a commitment more credible,
then governments should resist violating international law because they
want to preserve their reputations as law abiding. The incentive for such
a reputation in the monetary area is clear: governments want to convince
markets that they provide a desirable venue for international trade and
investment. Investors and suppliers seeking opportunities for international
commerce should prefer to do business with firms in countries that provide
a more certain legal framework with respect to the nondiscriminatory
fulfillment of international contracts. Although there is no central
enforcement of this obligation, the desire to avoid reputational costs
should motivate compliance.
The question is, when will reputational costs have their greatest impact?
My first hypothesis is that costs are greatest when a violator is an outlier
among comparable countries. That is, rule violation is most costly when
comparable countries manage to continue to comply. On the one hand, the
more competitors are willing to comply, the greater the pressure for any
one country to comply, even in the face of economic pressure to protect the
national economy through restrictions or multiple exchange rates. On the
other hand, if it is common for Article VIII countries in the region to
disregard their commitment, this should increase the probability that any
given country in that region will decide against compliance. Rampant
violation makes it difficult for markets to single out any one violator for
‘‘punishment.’’ Thus, we should expect compliance to be positively
influenced by what other countries choose to do.
Consider next characteristics of the domestic polity itself. Several analysts have implied that compliance with international legal commitments
is much more prevalent among liberal democracies, pointing to the constraining influence exercised by domestic groups who may have interests
in or a preference for compliant behavior.50 In this view participatory
politics might put pressure on the government to comply, especially in the
case where noncompliance involves curtailing the rights of residents to
foreign exchange (it is less clear how this argument relates to the choice
to implement or maintain a unified exchange-rate system). Others have
argued that the most important characteristic of liberal democracy when
it comes to international compliance is its strong domestic commitment
50

See Young 1979; and Schachter 1991. See also Moravcsik 1997.

586

International Law and International Relations

to the rule of law. *** In essence, these are affinity arguments: they seem
to suggest that domestic norms regarding limited government, respect for
judicial processes, and regard for constitutional constraints51 ‘‘carry over’’
into the realm of international politics. They rest on an intuitively
appealing assumption that policymakers and lawmakers are not able to
park their normative perspectives at the water’s edge.52
There are other reasons, however, to expect the rule of law to be
associated with Article VIII compliance. Countries respecting the rule of
law have a strong positive reputation for maintaining a stable framework for property rights. Markets expect them to maintain their commitments, and to undermine this expectation would prove costly. Countries
that score low with respect to the rule of law do not have much to lose by
noncompliance; erratic behavior is hardly surprising to investors and
traders. I use an indicator for the rule of law that is especially appropriate to test the market’s assessment of the reputation for rule of law: a sixpoint scale published by a political risk analysis firm expressly to assess
the security of investments.53 The scale represents the willingness of
citizens peacefully to implement law and adjudicate disputes using established institutions. Higher scores on this six-point measure indicate
the presence of such institutional characteristics as a strong court system,
sound political institutions, and provisions for orderly succession. Low
scores reflect an increased use of extra-legal activities in response to conflict and to settle disputes.
Since I have argued that the purpose of legalization is to make more
credible monetary commits, that compliance is market enforced, and that
markets prefer certainty in the legal framework, the comparison between
the participatory characteristics of democracy and rule-of-law regimes
should be especially telling. We have little reason to expect that democracy
alone provides the stability that economic agents desire; on the contrary,
popular participation along with weak guarantees for fair enforcement
of property rights can endanger these rights. Clearly, these two variables
are positively correlated (Pearson correlation ¼ .265), but they are certainly conceptually distinct and may have very different effects on the
51

52
53

‘‘International law is not unlike constitutional law in that it imposes legal obligations on
a government that in theory the government is not free to ignore or change.’’ Fisher 1981,
30. Constitutional constraints most often rest on their shared normative acceptance,
rather than on the certainty of their physical enforcement, providing another possible
parallel to the international setting.
See Risse-Kappen 1995b; and Lumsdaine 1993.
See Knack and Keefer 1995, 225.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

587

decision to comply with Article VIII obligations. Thus we are able directly
to compare two regime characteristics that are often conflated: democracy with its participatory dimensions on the one hand and the rule of
law with its emphasis on procedural certainty on the other. Monetary
compliance should therefore be conditioned by (1) compliance by other
countries in the region, and (2) a country’s reputation for respecting the
rule of law. Participatory democracy is expected to have no effect.
The central explanation for compliance should revolve around these
reputational factors. Still, it is important to control for other factors that
could influence the compliance decision. Consistent with the reputational
argument, it may be more costly for a country that is highly dependent on
world trade to violate Article VIII. Certainly, retaliation would be more
costly to nationals of such a country. Second, it is plausible that countries
defending a fixed exchange rate might find it more difficult to maintain
Article VIII obligations; countries that had shifted to more flexible regimes
would not be under the same pressure to conserve foreign exchange for
purposes of defending the currency’s peg.54 Third, use of the IMF’s
resources could provide an incentive to comply. Pressure from the IMF
should be especially strong when countries are in need of a loan. Fourth, it
may be the case that compliance is enhanced by the nesting of the Article
VIII regime within a broader regime of free trade. Membership in the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) might encourage a country to maintain free and nondiscriminatory foreign exchange markets.55
Finally, compliance may simply become easier with the passage of time.
Thus the following control variables provide a small sample of other factors that could encourage compliance: (1) positive economic conditions,

54

55

The board clearly recognized this was the case: ‘‘It was quite evident that flexible rates
made it easier for a country to eliminate payment and trade restrictions. This made the
fact that several European countries were now accepting the obligations of Art VIII on
the basis of a fixed parity all the more significant.’’ Peru’s currency was still fluctuating.
Executive board minutes, 8 February 1961, EBM/61/4., p. 15, C/Peru/424.1, Trans.
Arrange., Members’ Intent to Use (IMF Archives).
Indeed, the date of GATT’s entry into force was conditioned on the acceptance of Art.
VIII, sec. 2, 3, and 4 obligations by the contracting parties to the GATT. According to
a memo circulated among the staff of the IMF, ‘‘The date of entry into force of the revised
[GATT] rules concerning discrimination and quantitative restrictions is linked specifically to the date at which the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund
Agreement become applicable to such contracting parties as are members of the Fund, the
combined foreign trade of which constitutes at least 50 per cent of the aggregate foreign
trade of all contracting parties.’’ Article VIII and Article XIV, memo prepared by Irving
S. Friedman, 24 May 1955 (IMF Archives).

588

International Law and International Relations

(2) a high degree of trade dependence, (3) flexible exchange rates, (4) use of
IMF resources, (5) membership in the GATT, and (6) the passage of time.
In this case the compliance decision is modeled using logistical regression (logit), with the dependent variable taking on a value of 1 for the
presence of restrictions or multiple exchange rates and zero for the absence
of both. (Since we are analyzing only Article VIII countries, each instance
of restrictions or multiple-rate systems is also a case of apparent noncompliance.) Because the data consist of observations across countries
and over time, with a strong probability of temporal dependence among
observations, a logit specification is used that takes explicit account of
the nonindependence of observations.56 The results are reported in
Table 22.2.
One of the most important findings of this analysis is, again, the
clustering of compliance behavior within regions. Article VIII countries
are much more likely to put illegal restrictions on current account or use
illegal multiple exchange-rate regimes if other countries in the region are
doing so. The impact of regional behavior is substantial: the difference
between a region with no violators compared to one with nearly all violators increased the probability of noncompliance by 79 percent. Could
this be the result of common economic pressures sweeping the region?
This explanation cannot be completely ruled out, but it is rendered less
likely by the range of economic variables included in the specification.
The inclusion of various measures of current account difficulty and GDP
growth failed to wash out apparent regional convergence. Compliance
decisions are apparently not being made on the basis of economic conditions alone, but with an eye to standards of regional behavior. The most
obvious reason for this concern would be reputational consequences in a
competitive international economic environment.
The domestic political variables tell an interesting story about regime
characteristics. In contrast to theories of international behavior that
concentrate on the law consciousness of democracies, the evidence presented here suggests that, in this set of countries, democracy may be
associated with a greater tendency to violate the country’s international
monetary obligations.57 Substantive interpretation of the coefficients
56

57

Beck, Katz, and Tucker 1998. A counter vector was employed using the STATA routine
made available on Richard Tucker’s Web site at ,http://www.fas.harvard.edu/;rtucker/
papers/grouped/ grouped3.html.. Three cubic splines were included in the analysis but
are not reported here.
This conclusion is not significantly altered by the use of the combined democracyautocracy variable.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

589

table 22.2. Influences on the Decision to Violate
Article VIII Obligations
Explanatory
variables
Constant
Rule of law
Democracy
Regional
noncompliance
Balance of
payments/GDP
(t  1)
Balance-of-payments
volatility
Change in GDP
Openness
Year
Flexible exchange rates
Use of fund resources

Model 1

Prob. . v2
Log likelihood

Model 3

17.8***
17.13*** 17.3***
(4.75)
(4.88)
(4.89)
.340***
.346*** .272**
(.020)
(.119)
(.133)
.017*
.016
.018*
(.010)
(.010)
(.010)
5.57***
5.47***
5.21***
(.554)
(.540)
(.567)

Model 4
17.9***
(4.77)
.333***
(.120)
.018*
(.010)
5.45***
(.553)

.030**
(.013)

.031**
(.013)

.029**
(.013)

.030**
(.012)

.753***
(.257)
.055*
(.032)
.014***
(.003)
.198***
(.051)
—

.794***
(.262)
.057*
(.032)
.014***
(.003)
.188***
(.053)
.270
(.404)

.793***
(.276)
.056*
(.033)
.014***
(.003)
.186***
(.052)
—

.716***
(.266)
.055*
(.031)
.014***
(.003)
.203***
(.052)
—

—

GATT member
N
Wald v2

Model 2

—
593
(11)
207.63
0.000
137.7

593
(12)
207.04
0.000
137.4

.601
(.404)
—
593
(12)
215.52
0.000
136.6

—
.377
(.334)
593
(12)
220.2
0.000
137.3

Note: The dependent variable is an apparent Article VIII violation, either a restriction on
current account or multiple exchange-rate system. This analysis covers Article VIII countries
only. Logit coefficients are reported with correction for nonindependence of observations.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Estimation includes three cubic splines, which are
not reported here.
*** p . jZj ¼ .01.
** p . jZj ¼ .05.
* p . jZj ¼ .10.

590

International Law and International Relations

reveals a highly asymmetrical impact; however, a move from zero to 5 on
the democracy scale increases the chances of violating a commitment by
only 2.89 percent, whereas a move from 5 to 10 on that scale increases
the probability of violating by 10.8 percent. Why this might be so is
not difficult to understand. A rich literature in political economy suggests
that a potential cost of democracy is that the public does not always fully
anticipate the consequences of its aggregate demands. For example, if
democracies allow for macroeconomic policies that exhibit an inflationary bias,58 participatory politics may complicate the international
compliance problem. However, a strong domestic commitment to the
rule of law contributed positively to Article VIII compliance. Again, the
impact is somewhat asymmetrical for values on the explanatory variable.
A move from 1 to 3 on the six-point rule-of-law scale reduced the
probability of violating Article VIII by 17.7 percent, whereas a move from
4 to 6 reduced the probability of violating by about 4 percent. The effect
of the rule of law is understandable in light of the argument about uncertainty and reputation: governments that have invested heavily in a reputation for respecting the rule of law – one aspect of which is protecting
property rights – have a lot to lose by reneging on their international
obligations.
None of the control variables affects these findings. As anticipated,
a weakening balance of payments, as well as higher volatility, contributes
to violation, as does a worsening business cycle. Governments of more
open economies work hard to abide by their obligation of policy openness,
consistent with our expectation. Surprisingly, compliance with these
obligations does not improve over time; if anything, violations worsen
over the years when other variables in the model are held constant. Flexible
exchange rates, GATT membership, and the use of IMF resources may be
important institutional contexts for international economic relations, but
they do not systematically affect the compliance decision.

conclusions
The legalization of some central aspects of the international monetary
regime after World War II allows us to examine the conditions under
which law can influence the behavior of governments in the choice of
their international monetary policies. Historically, this policy area has
been devoid of international legal rules. The classical gold standard did
58

See the review of this literature in Keech 1995.

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

591

not depend on international legal commitments for its reputed stability.
‘‘Soft’’ international legal commitments began to develop only in the
interwar years, largely in response to markets’ shattered confidence in the
ability of governments to maintain the commitments they had made unilaterally in the previous period. Driven by the need to limit the externalization of macroeconomic adjustment costs, some governments sought
international commitments as a way to enhance certainty and reassure
markets. However, these commitments were in the softest possible form
and did little to constrain behavior or encourage the confidence of
economic agents.
The Bretton Woods agreement brought to an end the unbridled national legal sovereignty over monetary affairs. They hardly represent the
triumph of legalization over market forces, however, as attested to by the
breakdown of the original legal obligation to defend a par value system.
Legal obligations cannot stifle market forces: capital mobility has made
fixed rates very nearly unmanageable, treaty arrangements to the contrary notwithstanding. The end of the legal obligation to defend pegged
rates is a clear reminder that legalization cannot be viewed in teleological
terms. Obligations that increasingly frustrate major players as market
conditions change are not likely to remain obligations for long.
* * *
Legalization is one way governments attempt to make credible their
international monetary commitments. The evidence shows that governments are hesitant to make international legal commitments if there is a
significant risk that they will not be able to honor them in the future. The
hazard models of the rate of acceptance of Article VIII indicate that
commitment is associated with conditions that one can reasonably
anticipate will make compliance possible. Balance-of-payments weakness
and volatility could and did delay the acceptance of obligations for
openness significantly. Furthermore, economic downturns and unanticipated balance-of-payments difficulties were associated with noncompliance among Article VIII countries. However, both the archival evidence
and the quantitative analysis presented here suggest that governments
wanted to be relatively sure they could comply before they committed
legally to the open foreign exchange regime. Legal commitment was part
of a strategy to make a credible commitment to maintain a liberal foreign
exchange regime.
Among Article VIII countries, two regime effects had clear consequences for compliance. Surprisingly for those who view the international

592

International Law and International Relations

behavior of democracies as somehow distinctive with respect to law and
obligation, the more democratic the Article VIII country, the more likely it
may have been (p ¼ .10) to place restrictions on current account. On the
other hand, regimes that were based on clear principles of the rule of law
were far more likely to comply with their commitments. This finding
indicates that rules and popular pressures can and apparently sometimes
do pull in opposite directions when it comes to international law
compliance. There is no reason to think, based on these findings, that
democracy itself is a positive influence on the rule of law in international
relations. On the contrary, there is more reason to associate compliance
with the extent to which the polity in question respects institutional
channels for mediating domestic conflict and protecting property rights
than with a participatory or competitive political system. Some analysts
have argued that this finding can be understood as a normative constraint
on foreign policy choice. But it is also consistent with rational market
incentives, since rule-of-law regimes have more to lose reputationally
than do capricious regimes in the event of a legal violation.
One of the most interesting findings of this research has been the evidence that commitment and compliance are related to the commitment
and compliance patterns beyond one’s own borders. The hazard model
clearly indicates that the breadth of acceptance influenced acceptance
by uncommitted governments. Both worldwide and regional acceptance
of Article VIII status had this effect, even when controlling for time.
Furthermore, the pervasiveness of restrictions within a region has a negative effect on the compliance decision among Article VIII countries. It is impossible to know from these associational effects, of course, exactly what
kinds of mechanisms might be at play in such a relationship. I have argued
that these kinds of regional and universal effects likely reflect the strategic
nature of implementing restrictions: punishment by economic agents and
retaliation or other pressures by trading partners, for example, may be
minimal where restrictions are common (since it is prohibitively costly to
punish everyone). Those who offer more normative explanations of state
behavior might interpret this pattern as an example of the importance of
regional norms of appropriate behavior. Or perhaps it is simply the case
that although governments feel some moral obligation to obey the law,
their willingness to comply breaks down as others abandon the rules at
will. Although these tests cannot distinguish these distinct explanations,
the ability to document a degree of contingent compliance provides a
basis for disentangling the possible mechanisms in future research. What
we can say is that compliance and commitment are likely influenced,

The Legalization of International Monetary Affairs

593

for whatever reason, by the actions taken by other members of the international system.
This research has broader implications for the study of legalization
and compliance with international legal obligations. It shows that legalization as a tool for commitment is limited by economic conditions and
market forces. International monetary legalization can be characterized
by an inverted ‘‘J’’ pattern: legalization was nonexistent under the classical gold standard and soft during the interwar years. It peaked between
1946 and 1971, when treaty obligations regulated the central relationship among currencies, and now involves definite obligations over a
more limited range of policies. Much of the behavior that constitutes international monetary relations remains completely outside of legalized
relationships, especially rules and practices with respect to the provision
of liquidity.59
Rather than debating whether compliance is pervasive or minimal,60
my purpose here has been to examine the conditions under which
compliance is likely. The study of international law compliance is rife
with problems of conceptualization and measurement,61 but in this case
it has been possible to match a treaty obligation with authoritative assessments of behavior over time for a large number of countries and to
match the suggested mechanisms with contextual archival materials. The
evidence taken together points to law as a hook for making a credible
commitment, with compliance largely ‘‘enforced’’ by the anticipation of
reputational consequences.
59

60

61

Art. VII, sec. 2 empowered the IMF to borrow from a member but also provided that no
member should be obliged to lend to the IMF. Thus the General Agreement to Borrow
was negotiated by the managing director and representatives of the signatory countries
outside normal IMF channels. Reminiscent of the Tripartite Agreement, it was enshrined
as a series of identical letters among participating countries. Swaps are also soft arrangements created by central banks and operating through the Bank of International Settlements. These were developed completely outside of the IMF framework. Dam 1982, 150.
Nor are IMF standby arrangements a contract in the legal sense. Failure to carry out
the performance criteria in the letter of intent is not a breach of any agreement and certainly not a breach of international law. All the ‘‘seal of approval’’ effects come despite the
nonlegal nature of this commitment. The Executive board’s decision of 20 September
1968 explicitly concerns the nonlegal status of standby arrangements. Gold 1979, 464–66.
On this point, compare Chayes and Chayes 1993 and 1995 and Henkin 1979 with
Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom 1996.
These issues are discussed in Simmons 1998.

23
Constructing an Atrocities Regime: The Politics
of War Crimes Tribunals
Christopher Rudolph

* * *
*** From the notorious ‘‘killing fields’’ of Cambodia to recent evidence
of brutality in Sierra Leone, the grizzly nature of ethnic and other identityoriented conflict incites horror, outrage, and a human desire for justice.
In response to reports of atrocities in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Rwanda the
international community established ad hoc international war crimes
tribunals to investigate crimes and prosecute perpetrators.1 Successive
efforts have been made to expand the atrocities regime by forming a
permanent tribunal, the International Criminal Court (ICC). *** Proponents support international tribunals not only as a means of holding
perpetrators of atrocities accountable but also as a mechanism of peace
by establishing justice and promoting reconciliation in war-torn regions.
Former U.S. Secretary of State Madeline Albright proposed that, ‘‘In the
end, it is very difficult to have peace and reconciliation without justice.’’2
*** I seek to identify and analyze the myriad political and procedural
obstacles to establishing an effective atrocities regime by examining
humanitarian norms, the strategic interests of powerful states, and bureaucratic factors. *** I argue that although liberal humanitarian ideas have

1

2

Another is being established for Sierra Leone pursuant to S.C. Res. 1315, UN SCOR, UN
Doc. S/RES/1315 (2000).
Los Angeles Times, 19 October 1999, A6.

I thank Arthur Stein; Kenneth Abbott; Gary Jonathan Bass; the editors of IO, Peter Gourevitch
and David Lake; and two anonymous referees for their extremely helpful and constructive
comments. The generous financial support of the Institute for the Study of World Politics,
Washington, D.C., and the UCLA Graduate Division is gratefully acknowledged.

594

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

595

created the demand for political action, the process of dealing with
brutality in war has been dominated by realpolitik – that is, furthering
the strategic interests of the most powerful states. However, by understanding the political interests and procedural obstacles involved, the
international community can make institutional adjustments in the design
and implementation of an atrocities regime to bridge the gap between
idealpolitik and realpolitik. ***
*** Historically, warfare has been viewed as consistent with the laws of
nature. Hugo Grotius, in his seminal work De Jure Belli ac Pacis Libri
Tres (The Law of War and Peace), provides vivid accounts of wartime
brutality consistent with norms of the time, citing Hellenic, Roman, and
Biblical texts. Moreover, though Grotius includes some limitations on
what was permissible in war, they would certainly be considered barbaric
by modern liberal sensibilities. These norms permitted, for example, the
killing or injuring of all who were in the territory of the enemy, including
women, children, captives, and those whose surrender had not been
accepted.3 Rather than focusing on the jus in bello, Grotius is in fact more
concerned with notions of the jus ad bello.4
In matters involving acts of war and treatment of a nation’s citizenry,
the dominant norm in the modern period is deference to national sovereignty. In fact, ‘‘prior to 1945, no principle of international law was
more widely revered in practice than the idea of ‘domestic jurisdiction’ on
matters relating to human rights.’’5 Since the Holocaust, however, there
has been tremendous interest in promoting human rights and creating
more stringent standards of international conduct, including during
armed conflicts, that is consistent with these evolving ideas.6 What
explains the dramatic turn in the 1990s toward legalization? What drives
the process of forming and applying the regime in given cases? ***

ideas, interests, and institutions
*** [Kenneth Abbott] suggests that, ‘‘IR helps us describe legal institutions richly, incorporating the political factors that shape the law; the
interests, power, and governance structures of states and other actors;

3
4

5
6

Grotius [1925] 1962, 641–62.
Jus in bello focuses on conduct in war and the protection of civilians during armed
conflict (crimes of war), whereas jus ad bello refers to acceptable justifications for the
resort to armed force (the just war). See Christopher 1994.
Beres 1988, 124.
See Sikkink 1993 and 1998; and Finnemore 1996.

596

International Law and International Relations

the information, ideas, and understandings on which they operate; [and]
the institutions within which they interact.’’7 Although the movement to
establish a universal atrocities regime *** is predicated on the international community’s desire to strengthen norms of human rights and
justice, it is fraught with political obstacles and differing views on how to
negotiate this complicated normative and strategic terrain. ***
Within the domain of IR theory, *** [realists] generally argue that in
a world of asymmetrical power distribution with no international body to
exert pressure, ‘‘logics of consequences dominate logics of appropriateness.’’8 *** Realists predict that powerful states will not accept a regime
that significantly undermines its ability to respond to perceived security
threats. Moreover, they would predict that both the forms such institutions take and the application of their jurisdictions in particular cases will
thus reflect the interests and relative power of the states involved. *** In
contrast to realists, constructivists reject this notion that state interests are
static and centered only on material factors; they suggest that such factors
explain neither state behavior regarding human rights nor humanitarian
intervention.9 Regarding the creation of war crimes tribunals, constructivists would argue that evolving liberal ideas and concern for human
rights explain outcomes and that analysis should focus on these variables
in explaining regime formation. Ideas and norms produce outcomes
either through ‘‘path dependence’’ or international socialization and gain
strength as they become increasingly embedded, producing an idealpolitik to complement realpolitik.10
Bridging the gap between these two points of view, liberal institutionalism suggests that the proclivity for conflict in the anarchic international
system can be overcome through carefully designed institutions whose
purpose is international cooperation.11 States engage in international
regimes and abide by international treaties to realize gains contingent on
cooperation, and states may forgo short-term gains to obtain long-term
objectives. In the case of the emerging atrocities regime, these goals

7
8
9

10

11

Abbott 1999, 362.
See Krasner 1999, 51; see also Morgenthau 1985; and Carr 1961.
See Finnemore 1996; Goldstein and Keohane 1993; Katzenstein 1996; Sikkink 1993;
and Wendt 1992 and 1999.
On ‘‘path dependence,’’ see Weber 1920; Goldstein and Keohane 1993; and Meyer, Boli,
and Thomas 1987. On international socialization, see Bull 1977; and Watson 1992.
See Abbott and Snidal 1998; Axelrod 1984; Axelrod and Keohane 1985; Keohane and
Martin 1995; Oye 1986; and Stein 1990. On regime theory, see Hasenclever, Mayer, and
Rittberger 1997; and Krasner 1983.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

597

clearly are attempts to alleviate political and identity-based conflict ***
and to produce compliance (that is, deterrence).12 *** Applied to the
case of war crimes tribunals, this perspective suggests that success hinges
on regime design and the strength of the resulting institution.13 The
central tension here is between ‘‘hard’’ and ‘‘soft’’ law.14 Those who favor
hard law in international legal regimes argue that it enhances deterrence
and enforcement by signaling credible commitments, constraining selfserving auto-interpretation of rules, and maximizing ‘‘compliance pull’’
through increased legitimacy.15 Those who favor soft law argue that it
facilitates compromise, reduces contracting costs, and allows for learning
and change in the process of institutional development.16 *** Institutionalists would predict that a well-structured atrocities regime will not
only hold orchestrators of genocide and crimes against humanity
accountable but also deter future atrocities and help to alleviate tensions
in sensitive regions prone to egregious acts of violence.
I begin my analysis with three cases where tribunals were successfully
established: Bosnia, Rwanda, and Kosovo. These cases show the strong
link between political challenges and legal (and procedural) challenges,
especially when strategic interests of powerful states are not at stake.
Whereas the case of Bosnia reveals the political obstacles to initially
establishing an international legal regime, the cases of Rwanda and
Kosovo illustrate both the dynamic process of legalization and the effects of institutional learning; they also reveal the limited deterrent
capability of the atrocities regime – at least in the early stages of its development. I then examine two cases where tribunals were not successfully established: Cambodia and East Timor. I also examine the case of
the ICC, which continues to be marked by difficulties in achieving great
power support. These difficulties show how power and strategic interests
dominate regime formation; they also point to the need for a ‘‘softening’’
12
13

14

15
16

On ‘‘legalization,’’ see Abbott et al. 2000.
Keohane 1997, 501. Oran Young identifies three types of regimes: spontaneous, negotiated, and imposed. While constructivists might focus on ‘‘spontaneous’’ orders, liberal
institutionalists would examine the factors at play as the elements of a new regime are
negotiated, as I do here. Young 1983, 98–101.
Kenneth Abbott and Duncan Snidal define ‘‘hard’’ legalization as legally binding obligations characterized by high degrees of obligation, precision, and delegation, and define
‘‘soft’’ legalization as a more flexible manifestation characterized by varying degrees
along one or more of these same dimensions. Abbott and Snidal 2000.
See Abbott and Snidal 2000; and Franck 1990.
Abbott and Snidal 2000; on flexibility and learning in international agreements, see
Koremenos 1999.

598

International Law and International Relations

of the legalization process if political obstacles are to be successfully
overcome. ***

the icty in bosnia
The case of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) illustrates the political difficulties associated with establishing an
international legal regime where the strategic interests of powerful states
are not directly at stake ***. This case is especially salient given international lawyers’ initial desires to form a regime based on hard law, that
is, one that could transcend realpolitik by eliminating distinctions
between powerful states and weak states (equality under the law) and
could challenge long-held notions of sovereignty. There are legal
obstacles to creating hard law in an institution built on internationalism
and attempting to bring together states with very disparate legal
foundations. The case of the ICTY reveals the relevance of realism in
explaining tribunal action and the process of institutionalization. Although norms and ideas of human rights prompt calls for state action in
cases of genocide and war crimes, the case of the ICTY illustrates how the
strategic interests of powerful states (through the UN Security Council)
shape the process of institutionalization and its use.
* * *
In the early stages of the war in Yugoslavia (1990–91), the international
community seemed intent on preserving the territorial integrity of the
country and was hesitant to become entangled in a turbulent region
that had ignited World War I.17 *** One of the first events to prompt
decisive international action was the discovery of atrocities at the
Omarska detention camp near Prijedor. On 2 August 1992 New York
Newsday reported that Bosnian Muslims held at the camp were being
slaughtered by their Serbian guards. Moreover, subsequent reports
likened conditions in the camp to Nazi concentration camps.18 Similar
conditions were alleged at another camp at Trnopolje. Television
coverage worldwide showed striking images of men with protruding rib
cages, recalling for viewers images of inmates freed from concentration
camps at the close of World War II.19 The similarity between events in
17

18
19

Germany’s early recognition of Croatia and Slovenia conspicuously went against the
European consensus regarding the Balkan conflict. See Crawford 1994.
Gutman 1993.
Neier 1998, 135.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

599

Nazi Germany and contemporary Bosnia served to cultivate close
associations with World War II and its lessons. Considerations of the
‘‘Munich analogy’’ necessitated some kind of intervention.20
Further prompting analogies to Nazi-era crimes against humanity
was the program of ‘‘ethnic cleansing’’ being undertaken in Bosnia. Before this program was initiated, the population in the Prijedor municipality
of northwestern Bosnia, for example, was 112,470, of which 44 percent
were Muslim, 42.5 percent were Serbian, 5.6 percent were Croat,
5.7 percent were of mixed ethnicity, and 2.2 percent were ‘‘other.’’21 By
June 1993, figures released by the Serbian media showed that the
number of Muslims living in Prijedor had declined from 49,454 to
6,124; and the number of Croats from 6,300 to 3,169; but the number of
Serbs had increased from 47,745 to 53,637.22 An international consensus
developed that Serbs were the principal instigators of wartime atrocities; however, those who were to investigate the situation would find
it more complex than it appeared at the time. Cedric Thornberry noted
that ‘‘all three sides were responsible for appalling developments in
Bosnia. The actions of some of the Croats of western Herzogovina rivaled in barbarity those of Serb chieftains of eastern Bosnia, and what
was done to the Muslims of Mostar by Croats was perhaps as bad as
the Serb shelling of the mainly Muslim parts of Sarajevo.’’23 While
documented atrocities demanded international humanitarian intervention, the political and strategic complexities involved provided an
unappealing scenario for the international community. Some observers
drew an analogy between Bosnia and the Vietnam War, and pundits
considered the Balkan crisis a conflict that presented a ‘‘slippery slope’’
for all who dared to involve themselves.
*** Torn between the ethical desire to promote human rights and the
tactical and political challenges of intervention, the creation of a UN
tribunal represented a palatable compromise. As one analyst noted, ‘‘It was
a way to do something about Bosnia that would have no political cost
domestically.’’24
Using its authority under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, the Security
Council passed the resolution to create the ICTY for the purpose of prosecuting four clusters of offenses: (1) Grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva
20
21
22
23
24

Ibid., 136–37.
Ibid., 138.
Ibid., 139.
Thornberry 1996, 79.
Neier 1998, 129.

600

International Law and International Relations

Conventions (Art. 2), (2) violations of the laws or customs of war (Art. 3),
(3) genocide (Art. 4), and (4) crimes against humanity (Art. 5).25 ***
The first challenge of the ICTY was to establish guidelines for fairness
within its institutional structure, considered by international lawyers to be
a key component of its legitimacy. As one ICTY prosecutor remarked, ‘‘If
the tribunal is necessary . . . to bring a sense of justice to the victims, and
thereby undercut the hopeless cycle of revenge, then it is imperative that
everything the tribunal does be fair to the accused and conducted
according to the highest standards of due process.’’26 Hence, there has
been a strong push to make the body truly ‘‘international,’’ though the
influence of the UN Security Council is omnipresent. Judges are nominated and elected by the member states of the UN General Assembly,
but the list of nominees must first be approved by the UN Security
Council.27 Moreover, the chief prosecutor – a key figure in the adjudication process – is appointed exclusively by the Security Council on the
recommendation of the Secretary General, rather than being nominated
by the General Assembly, as is the case for judges. ***
The tribunal’s legal jurisdiction poses another challenge. According
to currently accepted notions of international humanitarian law, war
crimes are limited to situations of international armed conflict.28 Moreover, while the ICTY may prosecute breaches of the 1949 Geneva Convention, its jurisdiction is limited to ‘‘grave breaches.’’ As one legal
analyst noted, ‘‘A ‘grave breach’ can only be committed against a person
protected by the Convention; that is, only a person of a nationality different from that of the perpetrator.’’29 Therefore, the grave breach clause
does not cover, for example, the slaughter or rape of a Bosnian Muslim by
a Bosnian Serb. While international legal sovereignty was granted to
Croatia, facilitating adjudication by making the domestic/international
line more distinct, less clear are cases involving Kosovo and Rwanda
because the conflict was between rival ethnic groups and no such sovereignty has been granted. These crucial issues of jurisdiction were brought
up by the defense in the case of Dusko Tadic, a former official at the
Omarska prison camp. However, the court ruled that although Article 2
25

26
27

28
29

ICTY Fact Sheet, 16 September 1999, available at ,http://www.un.org/icty/glance/
fact.htm..
Schrag 1995, 194.
The roster of judges is diverse, though nationals of the permanent members of the
Security Council comprise nearly 30 percent of the presiding judges.
Morris and Scharf 1995, 391.
Scharf and Epps 1996, 651.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

601

of the Geneva Convention applies only to international conflicts, Article 3
applies to war crimes whether or not combatants are from different
countries, adding that ‘‘the distinction between interstate wars and civil
wars is losing its value as far as human beings are concerned.’’30
* * *
The most pressing challenge the ICTY faces is apprehending and
detaining defendants. At Nuremberg most surviving instigators of Hitler’s
‘‘final solution’’ were apprehended by the Allies and detained for trial.
The ICTY began with no defendants in custody. The problem this presents is clear: ‘‘The ad hoc tribunal for former Yugoslavia has itself to
arrange the capture of those it is to try. For this crucial element in the
procedure it will be totally dependent on the assistance of belligerent and
third states.’’31 This challenge is further compounded by the tribunal’s
prohibition on trials in absentia, a component of the institutional structure intended to bolster fairness of the proceedings; however, as Theodor
Meron noted, ‘‘without in absentia trials, the tribunal is left with few
options. The international community has given the tribunal strong
rhetorical support, but little aid in enforcement.’’32 Consequently, the
tribunal initially tried those having little political power or significance,
since those masterminding wartime atrocities were better able to elude
apprehension. Thus, as one analyst remarked, ‘‘the securing of the attendance of the accused war criminal may be random, ineffectual, and
arbitrary.’’33
Such obstacles, though initially daunting, have not been insurmountable. As of 1 March 2001, thirty-five defendants were awaiting trial in
the ICTY detention unit, and twelve cases had been concluded through
the appeals stage. *** The *** arrest of Slobodan Milosevic by Yugoslav
police on 1 April 2001 and subsequent extradition to The Hague on 28
June 2001 certainly represents a milestone for the tribunal regime.
Milosevic is the first head of state to face trial at the tribunal.
The ICTY’s experience in the Balkans reveals not only the legal and
procedural difficulties in designing a regime to combat atrocities but
also the influence of powerful states during the process of institutionalization. While vivid images from Balkan prison camps recalled memories

30
31
32
33

Prosecutor v. Tadic, IT-94-1-AR72, P77 (1995).
Fox 1993, 194.
Meron 1997, 4.
Fox 1993, 196.

602

International Law and International Relations

of the Holocaust and engendered public calls for action, powerful states
used the ICTY as a means to respond to such calls in a politically inexpensive way. Moreover, once the international community decided to
establish an ad hoc tribunal, the influence of the UN Security Council was
omnipresent in key aspects of its design, in particular, its jurisdiction and
the appointment of judges and the chief prosecutor. These same factors are
also evident in the application of the atrocities regime in Rwanda.

genocide in rwanda
In 1994 the atrocities regime was extended to Rwanda.34 This case is
instructive for two reasons: it illustrates how the interests of the great
powers affect the process of regime formation, and, perhaps more
importantly, it demonstrates that negotiating the political terrain between
‘‘hard’’ and ‘‘soft’’ law is a dynamic process involving degrees of institutional learning. Given the scope and magnitude of the atrocities committed in Rwanda and the procedural, bureaucratic, and budgetary obstacles
involved in developing an effective tribunal, this case illustrates the need
for institutional flexibility. Moreover, because the tribunal in Rwanda
followed the precedent set by the ICTY, this case allows us to assess
the regime’s broader goals: deterrence and national reconciliation.
Violence plagued Rwanda for most of the late 1980s and early
1990s, and on 6 April 1994 the plane carrying Juve´nal Habyarimana,
president of Rwanda, and Cyprien Ntaryamira, president of Burundi,
was shot down over Kigali, Rwanda. Ethnic Hutus immediately blamed
Tutsi rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, and within minutes after the
crash soldiers of the presidential guard began hunting down Tutsis and
indiscriminately killing all they encountered. Aid workers estimated that
as many as 500,000 Tutsis were killed in the month after the assassination.35 More than three-quarters of the Tutsi population in Rwanda
are estimated to have been killed.36 Another estimate suggests that in
April, May, and June 1994 more than half of Rwanda’s population of
7.5 million people were either killed or displaced.37 As was the case in the
early stages of ethnic conflict in the former Yugoslavia, Western governments were reluctant to intervene for fear of casualties. ***

34
35
36
37

An excellent historical account of the tragedy in Rwanda can be found in Des Forges 1999.
Time, 16 May 1994, 57.
Kuperman 2000, 101.
Time, 13 June 1994, 36.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

603

While military intervention was not forthcoming after the events of
April and May 1994,38 the UN Security Council created the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) on 8 November 1994. Its jurisdiction is time specific – that is, it covers only the period from 1 January
1994 to 31 December 1994; its scope is limited to those events temporally proximate to the assassination of President Habyarimana. To promote consistency between the two ad hoc tribunals – considered crucial
to establishing a clear precedent and consistent legal norms – Article 12
of the statute specifies that the appeals chamber of the ICTY will also
serve as the appeals chamber for cases brought before the ICTR. Moreover, to encourage consistency in investigations and prosecutorial strategy Article 15 specifies that the chief prosecutor of the ICTY will also
serve as the chief prosecutor of the ICTR.
That the basic structure of the ICTY was implemented in another
atrocities scenario speaks to its success in being perceived as an appropriate policy option in cases where massive human rights violations have
occurred. By 22 February 2001 forty-four suspects were being held at the
UN detention facility in Arusha, Tanzania.39 The ICTR was initially more
successful than the ICTY in detaining high-profile defendants, including
former military commanders and political leaders ***.40 Yet the ICTR
faces many of the same political and procedural challenges as the ICTY.
Although it can be argued that the war in Bosnia and Croatia was
an international conflict stemming from international legal recognition granted to the separatist republics, this was clearly not the case in
Rwanda. However, by ruling that Article 3 of the Geneva Convention
applies to both interstate and intrastate conflict, the ICTY opened the
door to international adjudication of internal conflicts, such as that in
Rwanda.41 The normative importance of this precedent cannot be
overstated, for it clearly expands the jurisdiction of the tribunal and
applies international law to issues that traditionally have deferred to
national sovereignty.42 While this precedent certainly aids the ICTR in
trying suspected war criminals in Rwanda, this expansion of jurisdiction
may become a significant obstacle to a working international criminal
court, since powerful states have expressed concern about an international court that seeks to expand its authority.
38
39
40
41
42

See Des Forges 1999; and Kuperman 2000.
,http://www.ictr.org..
LCHR 1997, 2.
Prosecutor v. Tadic, IT-94-1-AR72 (1995).
Meron 1995.

604

International Law and International Relations

The limited temporal jurisdiction applied to the ICTR is also a point
of contention that initially threatened cooperation between the tribunal
and the Rwandan government. In fact the Rwandan government opposed
the establishment of the tribunal as articulated in the Security Council’s
resolution, even though it initially solicited Security Council action.43
The Rwandan ambassador to the United States explained, ‘‘the government of Rwanda regarded the dates set for the ratione temporis competence of the international tribunal for Rwanda . . . as inadequate. The
genocide which the world witnessed in April 1994 had been the result of
a long period of planning during which pilot projects for extermination
had been successfully tested before this date.’’44 Reports of massacres
and ethnic violence taking place in 1991–93 were documented by
several agencies, including the Special Rapporteur of the UN (May
1993). Because of this, the Rwandan government proposed that the
tribunal’s jurisdiction be extended back to 1 October 1990, a proposal
ultimately rejected by the Security Council. While the Security Council’s
decision clearly helps to expedite the adjudication process by limiting
its investigation, Rwandan representatives have countered that this will
severely curtail its ability to achieve domestic reconciliation: ‘‘An international tribunal which refused to consider the causes of the genocide . . .
cannot be of any use to Rwanda because it will not contribute to eradicating the culture of impunity or creating a climate conducive to national
reconciliation.’’45 Here we see acute political tension between the need
for expediency in the adjudication process and the need for domestic
cooperation and holistic efforts to deal with the causes of the conflict.
According to the tribunal statute, the ICTR’s jurisdiction has primacy over national courts, and it may request national courts to defer to
it at any stage of ongoing proceedings.46 Clearly, for such transfers to
take place, cooperation with state authorities is imperative. In addition
Article 9 of the statute conforms to the principle of non bis in idem.47
These two principles are clearly at odds when national court proceedings are underway or have been completed. In cases where an ongoing
national trial is not impartial or independent, jurisdiction is to be transferred to the ICTR; however, the ICTR’s rules of procedure and evidence
43
44
45
46
47

New York Times, 29 December 1994, A1.
Bakuramutsa 1995, 645.
Ibid., 646.
ICTR statute, Art. 8(2). Similar jurisdictional primacy is codified in Art. 9.
Non bis in idem refers to prohibitions against trying defendants twice for the same
crime(s), often referred to as ‘‘double jeopardy.’’

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

605

offer no clear guidelines for doing this, nor do they specify who is to make
such decisions. Moreover, the primacy of the ICTR’s jurisdiction over
that of the national courts also pays little heed to the cultural elements of
local legal norms, an element that may be crucial to the tribunal’s goal of
achieving national reconciliation and alleviating ethnic tensions. The
ICTR is authorized to impose a maximum sentence of life imprisonment,
whereas the Rwandan national courts may impose the death penalty for
those found guilty of capital crimes. Rwandan diplomats have expressed
the common belief that those tried by the tribunal ‘‘would get off more
lightly than ordinary Rwandans who faced the death penalty in local
courts.’’48 The provisions prohibiting double jeopardy leave the national
courts no recourse when the tribunal’s decisions are seen as unjust. According to Rwandan legal sensibilities, the ICTR does not offer an adequate range of sentencing options to distinguish top-level planners from
those who carried out the plans. Because it is possible that those who devised and organized the genocide may escape capital punishment (if tried
by the tribunal) but those who simply carried out the orders may not (if
tried by domestic courts), such incongruities may not be conducive to
national reconciliation in Rwanda.49 This perceived incongruity was also
cited by the Rwandan government as a reason they could not support the
tribunal; instead, Rwanda established the Organic Law on the Organization of Prosecutions for Offenses Constituting the Crime of Genocide
or Crimes Against Humanity Committed Since October 1, 1990.50 These
new national laws, to be adjudicated in the national courts, classify suspects into four categories according to degree of culpability – leaders and
organizers are subject to the death penalty, whereas those accused of
lesser crimes may be eligible for reduced penalties in exchange for a complete confession, a guilty plea, and an apology to victims.51
* * *
Further hindering the ICTR’s ability to foster national reconciliation
is the tribunal’s lack of relevance to the Rwandan population. While the
statute identifies neutrality and independence as institutional imperatives –
largely because Security Council members believed the tribunal’s neutrality was essential for reconciliation – neutrality may in fact work against
48
49

50
51

Bakuramutsa 1995, 648.
Bakuramutsa 1995. See also New York Times, 2 November 1994; and International
Herald-Tribune, 9 November 1994.
Available online at ,http://www.rwandemb.org/prosecution/law.htm..
As specified in Art. 2, 5, and 14–16.

606

International Law and International Relations

reconciliation. ‘‘The structural distance of the ICTR from the Rwandan
social process makes it very difficult for the ICTR’s work to be relevant
and even more unlikely that its work will address the root causes of the
genocide.’’52 This ‘‘social distance’’ takes place at several levels. The
tribunal convenes in Arusha, Tanzania, not in Rwanda. This location,
though chosen to promote neutrality, instead separates the proceedings
from the people they were intended to help. Moreover, ‘‘there is a disconnection between the ICTR trials and the internal social process. Not
only the physical distance, but the way in which the ICTR has operated
and publicized its efforts does not involve the population in any real
sense.’’53 While the government-operated radio station provides limited
coverage of trial proceedings, there are no television broadcasts outside
the capital city, and few Rwandans understand the legal procedures and
proceedings.
From the outset, the relationship between the largely Tutsi government
of Rwanda and the ICTR has been, in the words of one analyst, ‘‘frosty.’’54
While simple logistics give the ICTR a strong incentive to limit the
duration of its legal jurisdiction – in August 1999 Rwandan detention
facilities held over 124,000 prisoners awaiting legal procedure55 – this
limitation may profoundly affect the tribunal’s success in establishing
reconciliation among the Rwandan population. Other analysts counter
that other forces are at play: ‘‘Those [temporal] limits were the product of
a highly political process within the Security Council and reflect
diplomatic concerns. Broader jurisdiction for the ICTR could well
have led to inquiries that would have embarrassed either the UN as
a whole or particular permanent members of the Security Council.’’56 Yet
dealing with a war crimes scenario as vast as that encountered by the
ICTR often poses a dilemma: Limiting the scope of the investigation and
trials may impede justice by not holding all of the guilty accountable for
their actions and reduce the tribunal’s success in achieving reconciliation
in Rwanda (and elsewhere); however, a more expansive role burdens an
already over-extended institution and may significantly affect its ability
to quickly resolve cases. ***

52
53
54
55
56

Howland and Calathes 1998, 161.
Ibid., 155.
New York Times, 21 November 1997, A10.
Deutsche Presse-Agentur, 13 August 1999.
Alvarez 1999, 397.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

607

the icty in kosovo
Further application of the tribunal system became necessary in 1999 as
ethno-nationalist warfare broke out between ethnic Albanian nationalist
forces and the Serbian army. While initial casualties were light by international standards, numbering some 2,500, accusations of renewed
‘‘ethnic cleansing’’ by Serbian forces surfaced after the failure of the
Rambouillet talks and subsequent NATO air strikes. Reports of mass
graves, torture, rape, and executions of ethnic Albanians poured out
of Kosovo as quickly as the thousands of refugees who left their homeland under duress; calls for war crimes investigations were nearly concurrent with NATO action. On 29 September 1999 it was announced
that the ICTY’s jurisdiction under its original statute would be extended
to Kosovo. Like the case of Rwanda, this case sheds light on whether
the tribunal’s actions in Bosnia had any effect on deterrence and national reconciliation. It not only addresses a conflict that occurred after
a tribunal action elsewhere but also allows us to assess whether fear of
adjudication affects the decisions of political and military leaders. In
this case many of those accused of atrocities had already been named as
perpetrators in the Bosnian conflict. The re-application of the atrocities
regime to the volatile situation in the Balkans also brings to the surface
the public’s perception of tribunal action, that is, whether decollectivization of guilt can promote national reconciliation and peace. On both
accounts, the case of ICTY action in Kosovo is not encouraging.
To gain ‘‘institutional momentum’’ during the Bosnia investigations, the
ICTY actively pursued investigations against defendants at all levels of
culpability. Most of the defendants and detainees in the Bosnia trials were
at the lower rungs of command and control, yet they were considered
important for establishing procedural norms and precedent. Functional
considerations have prompted the tribunal to pursue exceptionalism,
focusing investigations on successful prosecution of the significant players.
One court official noted, ‘‘As far as I’m concerned, [the tribunal] simply
can’t try every Tom, Dick, and Harry.’’57 The tribunal prosecutor added,
‘‘It is clear that the OTP [Office of the Prosecutor] ICTY has neither the
mandate, nor the resources, to function as the primary investigative and
prosecutorial agency for all criminal acts committed on the territory of
Kosovo.’’58 While there are tactical benefits to prosecuting low-level
57
58

Los Angeles Times, 27 August 1999, A5.
Statement by Carla del Ponte, 29 September 1999. Available online at ,http://www.
un.org/icty/pressreal/p437-e.htm..

608

International Law and International Relations

perpetrators, most analysts have stressed that the ICTY’s deterrence value
hinges ultimately on its ability to successfully prosecute those at the
highest levels.59
The Kosovo case is also very useful in analyzing the tribunal’s ability
to shape state action, since the conflict in Kosovo followed two tribunals
that successfully tried war crimes cases. Clearly, the evidence emerging
from Kosovo – mass graves, witness accounts of summary executions of
civilians, torture – suggest that Serbs were clearly undeterred by the
presence of the ICTY. This was documented by Cedric Thornberry,
who in his dealings with those involved in war crimes atrocities observed
that
Our interlocutors plainly were skeptical that the ‘‘international community’’
would do anything. In Belgrade and Zagreb, they usually preserved the
diplomatic niceties and kept straight faces, but often the sneer around the table
was nearly audible. In less sophisticated circles, when we spoke directly with
those we knew had been the instigators and warned them that justice would some
day come, the local establishment and its forces of law and order often snickered
aloud.60

Similar attitudes were also evident during hearings on Rule 61 held in
The Hague in July 1996 (discussed later); a witness testified that Ratko
Mladic scoffed openly at NATO’s inability to protect the Muslims in
Srebenica in July 1995, an event that occurred two years after the
ICTY was created.61 Clearly, the desired effect of adjudication, to deter
war crimes, has been significantly hampered by the difficulty of arresting
suspects, especially during the tribunal’s early period. Even prosecutors
in The Hague agree that ‘‘the only true deterrents . . . are not investigations but arrests.’’62 Yet members of the international community
seem to have little desire to take the tactical risks involved in apprehending the high-level perpetrators currently indicted.63 After the
Dayton Accords brought the conflict in Bosnia to a close, the NATO
59
60
61
62
63

See Scharf 1997, 219, 225; Alvarez 1999; and Morris 1997.
Thornberry 1996, 77.
Guest 1996, 80.
New York Times, 15 September 1999, A3.
A detailed plan to capture Radovan Karadzic, called ‘‘Operation Amber Star,’’ was
completed in April 1997 and involved several hundred French and U.S. commandos.
When advised of the plan, President Clinton wanted French forces to spearhead the raid;
however, Jacques Chirac was reluctant to assume such a ‘‘high risk’’ position for fear of
reprisals against French troops in the region. Likewise, Clinton and British Prime
Minister Tony Blair were reluctant because of concerns over potential casualties, and so
the plan was never executed. Time, 10 August 1998, 68–70.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

609

implementation force (IFOR) was given extremely cautious instructions
for dealing with indicted war criminals.64 Initial operating procedures
authorized IFOR troops to arrest those they encountered but did not
permit IFOR to seek them out.65 ***
In an effort to increase the deterrence value of the tribunal, given the
difficulties involved in arresting indicted war criminals, the ICTY established Rule 61 (under Art. 15 of the statute), which provides for a ‘‘superindictment’’ in certain instances. The purpose of this rule is to broaden
world awareness of perpetrators’ actions without violating the mandate
forbidding trials in absentia. It allows the indictment and all supporting
evidence to be submitted to the tribunal in an open court session. This may
include examination of witnesses whose testimony becomes part of the
record. Under the provisions of Rule 61, the prosecution may present
highlights of the case in the absence of the accused, essentially for the
media.66 While the line between executing Rule 61 and prohibiting
absentia trials is rather thin, the aim of the super-indictment is unmistakable: to ensure that those indicted will be considered international
pariahs, even if they manage to elude arrest.67 *** Rather than establishing closure through justice, these measures seem to be stop-gap attempts
to provide some sense of ‘‘justice’’ to victims of war crimes until the guilty
parties can be brought to trial. The question is, will such stop-gap
measures provide the necessary deterrence and reconciliation to mitigate
future transgressions of the jus belli, especially as time between transgression and adjudication becomes ever greater?
Although the slow pace of proceedings is understandable given the
legal and logistical hurdles facing the ICTY, it may hinder both deterrence
and national reconciliation.68 In a recent news report, interviews revealed
that many Serbs are avoiding responsibility for the ethnic hatred that
drove the program of ethnic cleansing, and many deny that atrocities,
such as those committed at Srebenica, ever really occurred.69 In an

64
65
66
67
68

69

IFOR was later renamed ‘‘Stabilization Force’’ (SFOR).
See Meron 1997, 5; and Bass 2000.
Thornberry 1996, 83.
Scharf and Epps 1996, 649.
One tribunal judge remarked that if Milosevic were turned over to the ICTY for trial, it
would be three years before his case would find a place on the docket. See Los Angeles
Times, 27 August 1999, A5. In a June 2000 report to the UN Security Council, it was
estimated that it would take sixteen years to complete the ICTY’s current caseload. See
Los Angeles Times, 6 July 2000, A10.
Los Angeles Times, 6 July 2000, A1, A10.

610

International Law and International Relations

opinion poll published in June 1999 by the newsmagazine Nin, almost
two-thirds of Serbs do not believe that the atrocities alleged in the
tribunal proceedings occurred; instead they ‘‘emphasize the high price
that Serbs are now paying.’’70 This sense of ‘‘reversal’’ was well
articulated by a Serb lawyer: ‘‘I didn’t kill anyone, but an Albanian
neighbor told me I would never be safe in Kosovo. I am a victim of their
ethnic cleansing.’’71 Others considered tribunal reports as nothing less
than anti-Serb propaganda. Ethnic Albanians seem particularly sensitive
to what they perceive as a whitewashing by the Serbian government.
Pajazit Nushi, member of the Council for Defense of Human Rights and
Freedoms in Pristina, notes, ‘‘Still, now, there is no single Serbian political
voice that has condemned the crimes.’’72 Moreover, the withdrawal of
Serbian troops from Kosovo has been accompanied by acts of violent
retribution by ethnic Albanians. One news account noted, ‘‘In the early
days of NATO occupation, many Serbs who stayed [in Kosovo] were
optimistic that they could forge a future with their Albanian neighbors.
But a wave of retaliatory killings of Serbs by Albanians enraged by
wartime atrocities has calcified emotions.’’73 Time is certainly not
assisting efforts to create a peaceful, multiethnic Kosovo, as new
justifications for animosity between ethnic groups are kindled and old
hatreds reinforced.
Clearly, the deterrence value of the emergent regime has been, to this
point, quite weak, owing largely to the reluctance of the international
community to aggressively pursue high-level perpetrators; however, the
arrest of Milosevic and the possibility of his extradition for trial at the
Hague tribunal leaves considerable room for optimism that the regime’s
deterrence power may dramatically increase. The case of ICTY action in
Kosovo also illustrates the limitations of the atrocities regime in promoting
national reconciliation in ethnically torn states. It remains to be seen
whether the arrest of Milosevic will serve to disclose the truth of events
that occurred during the Balkan conflict and promote national healing,
or whether his arrest and extradition in response to Western pressure
will further calcify animosities between ethnic groups in the region. The
ability of the ICTY to obtain Milosevic’s extradition is a crucial point in
the development of a more viable atrocities regime.

70
71
72
73

Los Angeles Times, 2 July 1999, A1.
Ibid.
Los Angeles Times, 10 October 1999, A1.
Ibid., A30.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

611

justice in southeast asia?
That the ICTY has not only survived but has served as a model for other
ad hoc tribunals, including a permanent international criminal court,
could indicate that war crimes adjudication is a successful policy tool.
However, although the regime has overcome considerable procedural
and structural obstacles in the Balkans and Rwanda, these obstacles
remain formidable in other cases. In regions dominated by power politics,
regime/norm development remains in the formative stage, especially in
situations where powerful states have strong incentives not to become
involved. Without the direct intervention by strong states and cooperation by governments in states where atrocities are alleged to have
occurred, the atrocities regime lacks strength.
Cambodia
It has been estimated that more than a million Cambodians died from
execution, torture, disease, or hunger from 1975 to 1979 under the Khmer
Rouge regime; some estimates go as high as 2 million. Although it is
unclear why a war crimes tribunal was not established earlier in the wake
of such a profound human tragedy, the institutional momentum of the
atrocities regime has prompted the UN to seek to establish a judicial
mechanism for Cambodia. The failure to establish a tribunal earlier can be
attributed to the interests of several Security Council member states and to
the recalcitrance of the current Cambodian government.
At the time atrocities were committed a tribunal was not in the strategic
interests of the United States; in the aftermath of the Vietnam War there
was little incentive once again to become entangled in Southeast Asia’s
political quagmire. Moreover, in adjudicating charges of war crimes,
information about U.S. secret bombings of Cambodia and other sensitive
information could become part of the public record. William Dowell, UN
correspondent for Time, suggests that many countries, including the
United States, ‘‘have used the Khmer Rouge to pursue their own political
interests in the region at one time or another, and all are reluctant to talk
about their relationship with the Khmer Rouge.’’74 This fear may be
particularly acute for China, already dealing with image problems that
complicate its bid for membership in the World Trade Organization.
Given the current political climate, Beijing is understandably hesitant to
have its role in supporting the Khmer Rouge regime exposed to the
74

Time, 22 January 1999.

612

International Law and International Relations

international community it wishes to engage.75 While such reasons may
discourage powerful governments from becoming involved, public
demands for action in Cambodia have also been less acute than was the
case for the Balkans or Rwanda. In the United States public desire for
justice and accountability has been tempered by an equally compelling
desire to ‘‘close the book’’ on the Vietnam era, reducing domestic
demands for state action.
Domestic resistance is also an important factor in Cambodia. Initial UN
attempts to establish a tribunal for Cambodia were met with little
cooperation from the Cambodian government, especially Prime Minister
Hun Sen. The UN has proposed several possible tribunal configurations,
all of which display institutional adjustments stemming from the lessons
learned in the Balkans and Rwanda. First, the UN wishes to try in a single
trial only twelve former political and military leaders of the Khmer Rouge,
thereby avoiding the protracted proceedings that plague other ad hoc
tribunals currently in operation; however, the Cambodian government has
expressed little interest. ‘‘We have no confidence in an international court
of law,’’ noted Hun Sen, showing concern that a trial may upset his fragile
hold on power in Cambodia.76 Hun Sen has been concerned that the scope
of criminal culpability may make reconciliation through justice problematic in Cambodia. As one observer remarked, ‘‘justice itself seems a rusty
chain that will only bloody anyone who tries to touch it. To try Khmer
Rouge chieftains would be, in a sense, to prosecute the whole country.’’77
* * *
The case of Cambodia also illustrates the problem time poses when
relying on adjudication to promote peace and reconciliation. Although
there is no statute of limitations on tribunal indictments, human rights
groups argue that because of the advanced age and poor health of many
suspects, quick action to create a tribunal is imperative lest Cambodia lose
its chance to bring Khmer Rouge leaders to justice.78
Indonesia and East Timor
In response to a successful referendum in September 1999 declaring East
Timor’s independence from Indonesia, pro-Indonesia militias mounted
75
76
77
78

South China Morning Post, 25 August 1999, 14.
Time, 22 March 1999, 56.
Time, 16 August 1999.
New York Times, 12 August 1999, A8.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

613

a campaign of violence and intimidation throughout East Timor. *** In
light of evidence of human rights abuses, the UN Commission for Human
Rights (UNCHR) opened a special session that resulted in a resolution
calling for a preliminary investigation into war crimes in East Timor, seen
by many as the first step toward establishing a war crimes tribunal.79 The
resolution specifically refers to Security Council Resolution 1264, in
which the Council ‘‘demanded that those responsible for such acts be
brought to justice.’’80 However, the government of Indonesia quickly
rejected the UNCHR resolution, a move that denied UN investigators
access to Jakarta’s military files. During the special session of the
UNCHR, the Indonesian representative dismissed the need for international intervention: ‘‘The Government last night had established a factfinding commission to compile information on human-rights violations
and bring the perpetrators to justice. It was important to ensure that this
august body not do anything that would open old wounds and exacerbate
problems in the territory.’’81 Indeed, the Indonesian government’s lack of
cooperation makes the creation of a tribunal quite unlikely.
That tribunals were not established in Cambodia and Indonesia reflects
two weaknesses in relying on international law to provide peace and
reconciliation in war-torn regions: the need for cooperation, both internationally and in war-torn regions, and the hesitancy of the international community to intervene militarily. While ad hoc tribunals may be
formed by fiat of the Security Council, the difficulties encountered by the
ICTY show how lack of cooperation may stifle institutional effectiveness
and regime development. Proponents of an international criminal court
point to Cambodia and East Timor, where the atrocities regime appears
beholden to the interests of the powerful, as evidence that such a permanent institution is necessary if a truly effective regime is to be established.

the international criminal court
*** While the ICC is not a specific case of the application of a legal regime
to an instance of genocide or crimes against humanity, examining its
development is crucial to understanding the political challenges of
expanding the existing ad hoc tribunal system to a more universal
79
80

81

UNCHR Res. 1999/S-4/1.
S.C. Res. 1264, UN Doc. S/RES/1264 (1999). See also S.C. Res. 1272, Art. 16, UN Doc.
S/RES/1272 (1999), available online at ,http://www.un.org/Docs/scres/1999/99sc1272.
htm..
UN press release, HR/CN/99/67, 23 September 1999, 6.

614

International Law and International Relations

atrocities regime. This case illustrates the tension between the need for
great power support and the desire to establish a hard law regime that
transcends power and political interests (that is, holds strong and weak
states equally accountable). *** The ad hoc system employed in the
existing atrocities regime is appealing to powerful states because it
facilitates adjudication, yet control over its application in a given case
remains with the Security Council. *** While the statute to create the ICC
is an established fact, its power as part of the atrocities regime remains
contested and indefinite, and its development is marked by concessions
made to great power interests. This case suggests that if the atrocities
regime is to gain widespread acceptance, the process of legalization will
likely undergo ‘‘softening’’ in order to mitigate the political contracting
costs of the new regime. As noted by Kenneth W. Abbott and Duncan
Snidal, hardening the legal foundations of the atrocities regime is a sensitive
and protracted process that may involve initially taking softer positions.82
Although President Clinton signed the Rome Statute on 31 December
2000 that created the ICC, the United States has long opposed several
key components of the Rome Statute, opposition still expressed by the
Bush administration.83 The first involves the universal jurisdiction
provisions as articulated in the statute that subject any state, signatory
to the statute or not, to the court’s jurisdiction.84 ***
The United States was also concerned that the scope of crimes covered
under the court’s jurisdiction was overly broad. ‘‘Crimes of aggression,’’
for example, is included, though no precise definition of ‘‘aggression’’ was
agreed on during the drafting of the statute. ***
Another concern was the prosecutor’s authority to investigate crimes
even in cases where no state party had issued a complaint. Under Articles
13 and 15, the prosecutor may investigate crimes proprio motu based on
information provided by parties within the court’s jurisdiction.85 U.S.
negotiators wanted to limit the power to bring cases to the court to the
Security Council, consistent with the precedent set by the ad hoc
tribunals. Without this limitation, U.S. negotiators argued, members of
the U.S. armed forces ‘‘would be subject to frivolous, politically motivated charges’’ that may hinder crucial peacekeeping missions in the
future if there was a possibility of ‘‘malicious prosecution.’’86 ***
82
83
84
85
86

Abbott and Snidal 2000.
Los Angeles Times, 15 February 2001, A4.
Rome Statute, Article 4(2).
Rome Statute, Article 13(c); 15(1).
David 1999, 357.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

615

Finally, the Clinton administration insisted on an exception for personnel involved in official military action. David Scheffer, U.S. ambassadorat-large for war crimes issues, stated that the United States wanted ‘‘a clear
recognition that states sometimes engage in very legitimate uses of military
force to advance international peace and security.’’87 *** Critics, however, argue that exceptions would render the ICC an empty vessel.
Richard Dicker, associate counsel for Human Rights Watch, argued that
the exceptions favored by the United States represent ‘‘a loophole the size
of the Grand Canyon that any rogue state would drive right through.’’88
*** One U.S. official remarked, ‘‘We have shown that the only way to
get war criminals to trial is for the U.S. to take a prominent role. If the U.S.
is not a lead player in the creation of this court, it doesn’t happen.’’89 While
Clinton’s signing of the Rome Statute was lauded by ICC proponents and
human rights organizations, it may be more symbolic than instrumental.
Articulating the Bush administration’s stance at the UN, Secretary of
State Colin Powell declared, ‘‘As you know, the United States . . . does not
support the International Criminal Court. President Clinton signed the
treaty, but we have no plans to send it forward to our Senate for ratification.’’90 As normative considerations press for harder legalization in
the emergent atrocities regime,91 negotiating the political dimensions
necessary to building institutional strength seems predicated on softening
some aspects to gain the necessary international consensus. The evidence
suggests that such softening measures have already taken place.

evaluating the atrocities regime
Formation
The evidence suggests that expanding liberal norms of state conduct and
protecting human rights certainly explain the existence of tribunals in
locales with little strategic or material importance. The proliferation of
human rights norms is evident in current legal trends in both the United
States and Europe.92
87
88
89
90
91

92

Quoted in Associated Press, 14 August 1999, PM Cycle.
Quoted in Associated Press, 14 August 1999, PM Cycle.
Time, 27 July 1998, 46.
Los Angeles Times, 2 February 2001, A4.
For example, holding perpetrators of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity
accountable independent of political power and interests involved.
Henkin 1990.

616

International Law and International Relations

In the United States the term human rights was articulated in only 19
federal court cases prior to 1900; this number grew to 34 from 1900 to
1944, 191 from 1945 to 1969, 803 in the 1970s, 2000 times in the 1980s,
and over 4000 times in the 1990s. In Europe the case load of the
European Court of Human Rights jumped from 11 cases during 1959–73
to 395 cases during 1974–92.93 ***
Exponential growth in the articulation of human rights norms is not
only a function of what Oran Young termed ‘‘spontaneous regime development’’; it is also being cultivated by nongovernmental human rights
organizations and aided by growing media coverage, often generated by
such groups as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International.94 In
addition the emergent atrocities regime itself may be seen as a norm
entrepreneur.95 Once established, the tribunal articulates and reinforces
norms of state conduct and may also apply direct pressure to states
through calls for investigations or by releasing information to the media.
Such pressures may be manifest at the systemic level, through states’
desiring to avoid being labeled ‘‘pariahs’’ or ‘‘rogues’’ or simply through
emulation.96 In a world of interdependence, reputation is a valuable asset
in maintaining positive relations with key partners.97 Pressures may also
follow a ‘‘bottom-up’’ path, especially in liberal democracies where public
exposure can generate policy demands. Certainly, additional research is
necessary to trace such demand-side questions and to identify the role of
the tribunals themselves in generating demands for political action.
However, though these developments signal the evolution of norms to
protect civilians during armed conflict, they may also be building norms
that preclude military intervention at early stages of crises. The danger
of relying on mechanisms that only respond ex post facto to atrocities
is clearly evident in both Bosnia and Rwanda. Though cognizant of
atrocities in Bosnia, ‘‘the major powers . . . backed away from significant
armed intervention. Facing domestic criticism for allowing the slaughter
to continue unchecked, some governments seemed to feel obliged to show
that they were doing something. It was in this vacuum that the proposal
for a tribunal advanced.’’98 *** Although human rights norms may be
strengthening, norms of military intervention (often necessary for
93
94
95
96
97
98

See Jacobson 1996; and Lutz and Sikkink 2000.
Young 1983, 98–99.
I thank an anonymous IO reviewer for this important observation.
Rosecrance 1999.
See Chayes and Chayes 1995, 230; and Keohane 1997, 501.
Neier 1998, 112.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

617

successful atrocities adjudication) make action increasingly difficult to
initiate. The same groups that lobby for adjudication and accountability
are often the most vocal opponents of military intervention. Moreover,
norms of intervention increasingly require multilateral rather than
unilateral action for both operational (cost-sharing) and political (legitimacy) reasons.99 Clearly, this has troubling implications for enforcement, for as the evidence presented here suggests, military intervention
may be necessary in many cases for successful adjudication.

Application
Realist variables of power and interest best explain why tribunals may
be established in some cases but not in others. Power and interest
strongly influence a state’s reluctance to establish a given ad hoc tribunal
or be signatory to a comprehensive international legal regime. In the
cases of Cambodia, East Timor, Chechnya, and Korea, great power
nations were obviously reluctant to expose sensitive issues in a public
arena, especially past or present collusion with despotic regimes (in the
Cambodian case). In addition, strategic interests figure prominently in
the reluctance of strong states to ratify the Rome Statute. Modern
warfare often necessitates destroying ‘‘civilian’’ targets for military victory, and in general ‘‘collateral damage’’ from bona fide military missions has rarely been considered a violation of human rights, even by
critics.100 These military actions may further the overall good, even when
the human cost is high; in other words, the ‘‘just war’’ may sometimes
involve regrettable human costs that should not be prosecutable offenses
under international law. The evidence presented here suggests that
powerful states are reluctant to engage any regime that may significantly
impede measures deemed necessary to achieving security. The dominance
of the Security Council in decisions to establish ad hoc tribunals has
been, to date, driven by state interests. While it can be argued that the
Balkans and Rwanda offer no particularly salient security incentives,
establishing tribunals was certainly not seen as threatening or compromising to great power interests.
* * *

99
100

Finnemore 1986, 180–85.
Donnelly 1998, 531. See also Morgenthau 1985, 253–60.

618

International Law and International Relations
Expanded Goals and Institutional Adjustments

*** While evolving norms of human rights may initiate the construction
of the atrocities regime in the first place, differentials in power and the
interests of the most powerful states clearly shape the process of
institutionalization. E. H. Carr suggested that, ‘‘The law is . . . the
weapon of the stronger. . . . Law reflects not any fixed ethical standard,
but the policy and interests of the dominant group in a given state at
a given period.’’ As such, ‘‘Politics and law are indissolubly intertwined.’’101 This certainly applies to the case of war crimes adjudication.
Iain Guest suggests that suspicions ran high, especially early in the
tribunal’s development, that the tribunal was serving as ‘‘a substitute, an
alternative, to the kind of tough political action which would put an end
to the ethnic cleansing that was taking place.’’102 States find establishing
a tribunal system appealing because it provides an economically and
politically inexpensive means of responding to demands for international
action; it enables states to commit at a level commensurate with their
strategic interest in the region involved. From the standpoint of realpolitik, the regime is a success whether or not it succeeds in bringing
justice or alleviating ethnic conflict. From the standpoint of idealpolitik,
the measures of success – reducing human suffering, protecting human
rights, and promoting regional stability – are certainly left wanting. Here
we must assess the tribunal’s success from another dimension – as
a component of conflict management.
Theodor Meron offers the best articulation of the regime’s more expansive and idealistic aims: ‘‘The great hope of tribunal advocates was that
the individualization and decollectivization of guilt . . . would help bring
about peace and reconciliation. . . . Another of the tribunal’s objectives
was deterrence of continued and future violations of the law.’’103 For
international lawyers the connection between a functioning legal regime
and political order is clear: ‘‘There can be no peace without justice, no
justice without law, and no meaningful law without a court to decide
what is just and lawful under any given circumstance.’’104 If peace is
a function of law and justice, is an atrocities regime the panacea for
the problem of ethnonationalist violence? Here, the current evidence
is certainly not compelling. Effective deterrence requires three
101
102
103
104

Carr 1961, 176–77.
Quoted in Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe 1996, 12.
Meron 1997, 6. See also Pejic 1998.
Ferencz 1980, 1.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

619

elements – commitment, capability, and credibility.105 The existence of
war crimes tribunals and the successful prosecution of initial cases did
little to curb actions in any of the cases examined. The record of U.S. and
NATO intervention in ethnic conflicts over the past thirty years has been
marked by very limited commitments, especially in cases where threats to
U.S. interests were limited.106 Because of the rather spotty record of the
West regarding intervention and the formidable institutional obstacles
facing the fledgling tribunal system, perpetrators of brutality have had
little reason to take UN commitment seriously. In terms of capability, the
United States has certainly possessed the power to apprehend war
criminals and political despots indicted by the tribunal. However, the
difficulty of apprehending such people came at an unacceptably high
logistical and political cost, considering that a large-scale military
commitment would be necessary and that to ensure stability such forces
would need to remain for prolonged periods.107 ***
Preliminary evidence does not seem to support notions that decollectivization of guilt through war crimes adjudication is, on its own, an
effective means to achieving national reconciliation – seen as essential in
dealing with ethnic or religious violence (identity-based conflict). In the
former Yugoslavia, ethnic tensions remain high and are accompanied by
sporadic violence and acts of retaliation on both sides.108 While instrumentalists may argue that ethnic tensions are manipulated by actors to
further material or political interests, the ability to generate group
solidarity and ethnic blood-lust is certainly facilitated by a historical
cycle of violence.109 In this sense, ethnic violence is congruent with other
forms of identity conflict, including religious wars, and groups have long
endured cycles of violence and reprisal.110 Decollectivizing guilt is a
105

106
107

108
109

110

See Morgan 1977; George and Smoke 1974; Lebow and Stein 1990; and Spiegel and
Wheling 1999, 497–500.
See Callahan 1997, 187–199; and Harvey 1998.
Chaim Kaufmann remarked that ‘‘such peaces last only as long as the enforcers remain.’’
Once peacekeepers are removed from the situation, the artificially established balance
of power shifts, an ‘‘ethnic security dilemma’’ arises, and the credibility of majority
commitment not to exploit minority ethnic groups falters, threatening to renew the cycle
of violence. See Kaufmann 1996,137; Posen 1993; and Fearon 1998.
See Los Angeles Times, 25 March 2000, A5; and Los Angeles Times, 4 March 2001, A1, A9.
Instrumentalist accounts also do not explain why ethnic and religious conflict tend to be
so much more barbaric than other forms of conflict. Targeting of women and children
and organized programs created to terrorize a population certainly carry no specific
advantages to conventional conflict in attaining material gains. See Lake and Rothchild
1998a, 5–7; and Brown et al. 1997.
Girard 1977, 24.

620

International Law and International Relations

curative measure taken by the state to break this historical cycle. However, the effectiveness of such a strategy is contingent on detaining highlevel perpetrators and, presumably, giving amnesty to those at lower
levels (perhaps in return for admitting guilt, fully disclosing events, and
testifying at trials of political and military leaders, as has occurred in truth
and reconciliation proceedings elsewhere). Yet early precedent set by the
tribunals runs an opposite course.
* * *
Decollectivizing guilt also does not provide a means of promoting
tolerance by shaping ethnic and national identities. Social constructivists
argue that ethnic identities are malleable and shaped by continually
changing social contexts, yet none of the currently debated elements of
ethnic conflict management incorporate a mechanism for ‘‘re-imagining’’
the sociopolitical community.111 It would seem that some mechanism
of social education should accompany decollectivization of guilt if the
atrocities regime is to succeed within these more expansive agendas.
* * *

conclusion
What lessons can be drawn from these initial developments in the atrocities regime? Realist factors have dominated the politics of war crimes
adjudication, but the atrocities regime is in its infancy. To dismiss the
efficacy of the atrocities regime at this stage is premature, and the evidence here suggests that its development is proceeding rapidly. From an
institutionalist perspective, we can ask how the regime can be strengthened, and what lessons can be learned from the existing ad hoc tribunal
system. IL analysts suggest that the strength of legal regimes centers on
consistency (precedent) and legitimacy, on hard law.112 Conversely,
regime analysts, most notably in the field of international political
economy, suggest that flexibility, rather than rigidity, increases regime
strength.113 Robert Keohane argues that ‘‘Institutions based on substantive rules have proven to be fragile entities,’’ adding ‘‘flexibility and
openness . . . may increase the usefulness of an international institution.’’114 Flexibility is also important when the long-term impacts of
111
112
113
114

Anderson 1983.
See Franck 1990; Jackson 1984; and Trimble 1990.
Krasner 1983.
Kahler 1995, 137. See also Goldstein et al. 2000, 392.

Constructing an Atrocities Regime

621

the institution are uncertain, especially when state sovereignty and/or
national security are involved.115 The key to establishing an effective
regime lies in squaring the circle between hard legalization and political
flexibility and locating the regime within a comprehensive program of
ethnic conflict management. On the first point, examining the cases as
part of a dynamic political development suggests that steps are being
taken to ‘‘soften’’ the legalization process – at least in the short run – in
order to attain flexibility and minimize concerns about sovereignty and
security. On the second point, the regime must be linked with other policy
tools applicable to ethnic violence, including preventive diplomacy,
foreign aid, international intervention, spatial separation and reconfiguring political spaces, and social education programs.116
War crimes adjudication also presents analytical challenges. A purely
legalistic (IL) view cannot accurately explain many of the political
dimensions involved in forming an atrocities regime nor can the highly
macroscopic, analytical view of IR. The issues presented here suggest
the need for a war crimes vocabulary and more mid-level theories for
understanding war crimes tribunals and their use in establishing justice and
promoting peace.117 Clearly, to understand and inform the development
of the atrocities regime, we need research that incorporates the overlap
between IL and IR.118 While researchers remain at the forefront of this
agenda, promoting peace and ameliorating human suffering provide
strong incentives for further analysis.
115
116

117
118

Abbott and Snidal 2000.
See Jentleson 1998; Kaufmann 1996; Lake and Rothchild 1998b; and Walter and Snyder
1999.
I owe this important insight to an anonymous IO reviewer.
See Goldstein et al. 2000; Keohane 1997; and Slaughter 1993.

24
The Origins of Human Rights Regimes: Democratic
Delegation in Postwar Europe
Andrew Moravcsik

The fiftieth anniversary of the UN Universal Declaration on Human
Rights marks an appropriate moment to reconsider the reasons why
governments construct international regimes to adjudicate and enforce
human rights. Such regimes include those established under the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights, and
the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
These arrangements differ from most other forms of institutionalized
international cooperation in both their ends and their means. Unlike
international institutions governing trade, monetary, environmental, or
security policy, international human rights institutions are not designed
primarily to regulate policy externalities arising from societal interactions across borders, but to hold governments accountable for purely
internal activities. In contrast to most international regimes, moreover,
human rights regimes are not generally enforced by interstate action. Although most arrangements formally empower governments to challenge
one another, such challenges almost never occur. The distinctiveness of
such regimes lies instead in their empowerment of individual citizens to
bring suit to challenge the domestic activities of their own government.
Independent courts and commissions attached to such regimes often
respond to such individual claims by judging that the application of domestic rules or legislation violates international commitments, even where
such legislation has been enacted and enforced through fully democratic
*** For an earlier version of this article with more detailed documentation, see Moravcsik
1998b.

622

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

623

procedures consistent with the domestic rule of law. Arrangements to
adjudicate human rights internationally thus pose a fundamental challenge
not just to the Westphalian ideal of state sovereignty that underlies realist
international relations theory and classical international law but also –
though less-frequently noted – to liberal ideals of direct democratic
legitimacy and self-determination. The postwar emergence of these arrangements has rightly been characterized as the most ‘‘radical development in the whole history of international law.’’1
Consider, for example, the ECHR, established under the auspices of
the Council of Europe and based in Strasbourg, France. The ECHR
system is widely accepted as the ‘‘most advanced and effective’’ international regime for formally enforcing human rights in the world today.2
Since 1953, when the ECHR came into force, it has sought to define
and protect an explicit set of civil and political rights for all persons
within the jurisdiction of its member states, whether those individuals
are aliens, refugees, stateless persons, or citizens. It initially established a
Commission on Human Rights to review petitions.3 The Commission
could investigate the case, seek to settle it, or forward it under certain
circumstances to a court of human rights, whose decisions governments
are legally bound to follow. Two optional clauses of the ECHR, Articles
25 and 46, were subsequently adopted by all member states; they permit
individual and state-to-state petitions and recognize the compulsory
jurisdiction of the court. Many European governments have subsequently
incorporated the convention into domestic law, directly or indirectly.
For these reasons, the ECHR Court is right to proclaim the convention
‘‘a constitutional document of European public order.’’4
Over the last half-century, analysts agree, the legal commitments and
enforcement mechanisms entered into under the ECHR have established
‘‘effective supranational adjudication’’ in Europe. Compliance is so consistent that ECHR judgments are now, in the words of two leading
1
2

3

4

See Humphrey 1974, 205, 208–209; Krasner 1995; and Falk 1981, 4, 153–83.
Petitions could be judged admissible if they meet several criteria, most importantly the
prior exhaustion of domestic remedies. Henkin et al. 1999, 551. In this article I am not
concerned with purely rhetorical human rights documents, such as the UN Universal
Declaration, but solely with enforceable commitments. Rights imply remedies, without
which the former are of little utility. Unsurprisingly, hypocrisy in signing declarations
without mechanisms for direct enforcement appears to be without significant cost,
regardless of a country’s domestic policies. ***
See Janis, Kay, and Bradley 1995; Robertson and Merrills 1993; and van Dijk and van
Hoof 1998. ***
Loizidou v. Turkey, 310 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A, 1995), 27.

624

International Law and International Relations

international legal scholars, ‘‘as effective as those of any domestic
court.’’5 In hundreds of cases where an explicit decision has been taken
or a ‘‘friendly settlement’’ reached – including matters of criminal procedure, penal codes and the treatment of prisoners, vagrancy legislation,
civil codes, systems of legal aid fees and civil legal advice, the rights of
illegitimate children, military codes, expropriation policies, systems of
awarding building permits, treatment of the mentally ill, reformatory
centers, wiretapping, and censorship of the press – governments have
amended legislation, granted administrative remedies, reopened judicial
proceedings, or paid monetary damages to individuals whose treaty rights
were violated.6 When the court recently ruled that exclusion of homosexuals from the British armed forces violated the ECHR, the British
government immediately announced its intention to comply. *** 7
There is a real theoretical puzzle here. Why would any government,
democratic or dictatorial, favor establishing an effective independent
international authority, the sole purpose of which is to constrain its domestic sovereignty in such an unprecedentedly invasive and overtly nonmajoritarian manner?
To answer questions such as this, political scientists tend to espouse
either a realist or an ideational explanation for the emergence and expansion of formal human rights regimes. Democratic governments and
transnationally active members of democratic civil societies either coerce
other governments to accept human rights norms (the realist view) or
persuade other governments to do so (the ideational view). Some scholars
espouse both positions at once, arguing that powerful democracies are
persuaded for essentially idealistic reasons to coerce others to respect
human rights norms.
Such realist and ideational conjectures, though popular among
scholars, rest on a remarkably thin empirical foundation. *** Only the
UN system – a notably weak regime – has been the subject of significant
research, and this body of work focuses on rhetorical statements, such
as the UN Declaration, rather than arrangements for adjudication and
enforcement.8 Such analyses, moreover, tend to accept uncritically the
ex post conjectures of practitioners and commentators.

5
6
7

8

Helfer and Slaughter 1997, 283, who draw on Shapiro 1981, 7, 26–36.
Carter and Trimble 1995, 309.
On domestic incorporation, see Polakiewicz and Jacob-Foltzer 1991; Drzemczewski
1983, 11–12; and Merrills 1993.
For the best of these, see Morsink 1999.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

625

This article contains the first systematic empirical test of competing
theories of the establishment of formal international human rights regimes. It does so by examining the negotiations to establish the ECHR
in 1949–50. I argue that the primary proponents of binding international human rights commitments in postwar Europe were neither great
powers, as realist theory would have it, nor governments and transnational groups based in long-established liberal democracies, as the ideational account would have it. Although established democracies supported
certain human rights declarations, they allied with dictatorships and
transitional regimes in opposition to reciprocally binding human rights
enforcement – a seldom-noted tendency for which realists and ideational
theorists have no explanation. The primary proponents of reciprocally
binding human rights obligations were instead the governments of newly
established democracies.
This curious pattern is explicable only if we adopt a different theoretical starting point: the domestic political self-interest of national governments. Establishing an international human rights regime is an act of
political delegation akin to establishing a domestic court or administrative
agency. From a ‘‘republican liberal’’ perspective – one related to institutional
variants of ‘‘democratic peace’’ theory as well as to the analysis of ‘‘twolevel games’’ and public-choice theories of delegation – creating a quasiindependent judicial body is a tactic used by governments to ‘‘lock in’’ and
consolidate democratic institutions, thereby enhancing their credibility
and stability vis-a`-vis nondemocratic political threats. In sum, governments turn to international enforcement when an international commitment effectively enforces the policy preferences of a particular government
at a particular point in time against future domestic political alternatives.
I argue that governments will resort to this tactic when the benefits
of reducing future political uncertainty outweigh the ‘‘sovereignty costs’’
of membership. It follows that ‘‘self-binding’’ is of most use to newly established democracies, which have the greatest interest in further stabilizing the domestic political status quo against nondemocratic threats. We
should therefore observe them leading the move to enforce human rights
multilaterally, whereas established democracies have an incentive to offer
lukewarm support at best. In the case of the ECHR, this theoretical
approach best explains the cross-national pattern of support for binding
norms, the tactics governments employed, and the archival record of public rhetoric and confidential domestic deliberations.
The implications of this approach go well beyond postwar European
human rights. The logic of ‘‘locking in’’ credible domestic policies through

626

International Law and International Relations

international commitments can be generalized to other human rights
regimes – including the recent International Criminal Court – and unilateral human rights policies, not least the apparently anomalous behavior
of the United States, as well as to other issue areas in world politics,
regardless of whether their substantive content is ‘‘liberal.’’ The latter include the stabilization of autocratic regimes under the Concert of Europe
and Comintern, and the coordination of monetary and trade policies.

existing theories of international human
rights cooperation
Existing scholarship seeking to explain why national governments establish and enforce formal international human rights norms focuses on two
modes of interstate interaction: coercion and normative persuasion.
Respectively, these define distinctive ‘‘realist’’ and ‘‘ideational’’ explanations for the emergence of human rights regimes. ***
Interstate Power: ‘‘For Countries at the Top, This Is Predictable’’
Realist theories of international relations, and thus of the origin of human rights regimes, stress the distribution of interstate bargaining power.
Governments accept international obligations because they are compelled
to do so by great powers, which externalize their ideology – a prediction
that follows equally from hegemonic stability theory and conventional
realist bargaining theory. * All governments seek to maintain full domestic
sovereignty wherever possible. With governments uniformly skeptical of
external constraints, the major limitation on cooperation is the cost of
coercion or inducement, which is inversely proportional to the concentration of power. Establishment of a binding human rights regime requires,
therefore, a hegemonic (‘‘k’’) group of great powers willing to coerce or
induce recalcitrant states to accept, adjust to, and comply with international human rights norms. The greater the concentration of relative
power capabilities, the greater the pressure on recalcitrant governments
and the more likely is an international regime to form and prosper.
Precise formulations of the realist argument vary. E. H. Carr, Hans
Morgenthau, and other classical realists maintain that governments employ liberal ideology, including support for human rights, to justify the pursuit of geopolitical interest.9 Jack Donnelly writes of the Inter-American
9

See Carr 1946; and Morgenthau 1960.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

627

Convention on Human Rights that ‘‘much of the explanation [for] the
Inter-American human rights regime . . . lies in power, particularly the
dominant power of the United States . . . . [It] is probably best understood
in these terms. The United States . . . exercised its hegemonic power to
ensure its creation and support its operation.’’10 John Ruggie uncharacteristically takes a similar line when he conjectures that human rights
regimes will be weaker than nuclear nonproliferation regimes, because
the former are of less concern to the core superpower security interests.11
Kenneth Waltz asserts that powerful nations invariably seek to impose
their views on other nations: ‘‘Like some earlier great powers, we [the
United States] can identify the presumed duty of the rich and powerful to
help others with our own beliefs . . . England claimed to bear the white
man’s burden; France had its mission civilisatrice. . . . For countries at
the top, this is predictable behavior.’’12 Alison Biysk links acceptance of
human rights norms to the pressure by international financial organizations such as the World Bank, backed by Western donor countries.13 ***
Normative Persuasion: ‘‘The Inescapable Ideological Appeal
of Human Rights’’
The most prominent ideational explanations for the emergence and
enforcement of human rights regimes look to altruism and the persuasive
power of principled ideas. Such explanations rest, to that extent, on what
used to be termed ‘‘utopian’’ or ‘‘idealist’’ foundations. The essence of such
explanations lies in the prominence of idealistic or altruistic motivations
for spreading liberal values.14 Governments accept binding international
human rights norms because they are swayed by the overpowering
ideological and normative appeal of the values that underlie them. ‘‘The
seemingly inescapable ideological appeal of human rights in the postwar
world,’’ writes Donnelly, who espouses a wide range of theories, ‘‘is an
important element in the rise of international human rights regimes.’’15
Ideational arguments differ most fundamentally from realist arguments in their reliance on a distinctive conception of interstate interaction. They explicitly reject choice-theoretic foundations and instead stress
10
11
12
13
14
15

See Donnelly 1986, 625, also 637–38; and Ruggie 1983, 99.
Ruggie 1983, 104.
Waltz 1979, 200. See also Krasner 1992.
Brysk 1994, 51–56.
Keck and Sikkink 1998, chap. 1–3.
Donnelly 1986, 638. On soft power, see Nye 1990.

628

International Law and International Relations

the transformative power of normative moral discourse itself. In this
view, a critical characteristic of political action in this area is that it is
‘‘principled’’ – that is, the altruistic and moral motives of actors have
persuasive power in themselves. Accordingly, the most fundamental
motivating force behind human rights regimes is not rational adaptation,
let alone coercion, but transnational socialization – the ‘‘logic of appropriateness.’’16 Many such explanations assert that transformations in actor
identities occur though the impact of ‘‘principled’’ nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) on domestic and transnational opinion.17 NGOs and
publics within established democracies set up transnational networks,
epistemic communities, and global discourses of human rights, dedicated
to the advancement of a normative discourse of human rights. This in
turn mobilizes domestic and transnational civil society at home and
abroad, eventually socializing foreign and domestic leaders.18
Whence the ideological appeal of human rights? Some scholars look
to human moral psychology, regional cultures, or salient historical
events, but the most plausible explanation links support for international
human rights protection to domestic democracy and commitment to
the ‘‘rule of law.’’19 In this view, which Thomas Risse terms ‘‘liberal
constructivism,’’ established democratic governments seek to extend
their domestic values abroad and recognize others who do so. The more
democratic they are, the more likely their espousal of human rights
values.20 Charles Kupchan and Clifford Kupchan conjecture that ‘‘states
willing to submit to the rule of law and civil society are more likely to
submit to their analogues internationally.’’21 Similarly, Kathryn Sikkink
points to the leading role of established democracies in promoting
human rights, such as linking Scandinavian support for human rights
enforcement to the salience of social democratic values in their domestic politics.22 Thomas Franck asserts that compliance with international law is a function of the normative acceptance of international
16
17
18
19

20

21
22

See Finnemore and Sikkink 1998; and Donnelly 1986.
See Sikkink 1993; Risse-Kappen 1994; and Finnemore 1996.
See, for example, Keck and Sikkink 1998; and Ramirez, Soysal and Shanahan 1997.
Russett 1993. For alternative views, see Keck and Sikkink 1998; Sikkink 1993; Sieghart
1983, 26–27; and Ando 1992, 171–72. See also Donnelly 1986; Whitfield 1988, 31, also
28–31; and Drzemczewski 1983, 220.
See Risse-Kappen 1996; and Moravcsik 1997. This view is related to the ideational
variant of democratic peace theory, in which the democratic peace results from the
tendency of liberal governments to externalize their domestic ideals. See Russett 1993.
Kupchan and Kupchan 1991, 115–16.
Sikkink 1993.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

629

rules, which in turn reflects (among other things) their consistency with
domestic values.23 In sum, governments promote norms abroad because
they are consistent with universal ideals to which they adhere; governments accept them at home because they are convinced doing so is
‘‘appropriate.’’
The desire to conform to shared ideas and norms of state behavior
(‘‘collective expectations about proper behavior for a given identity’’), in
this view, does not simply regulate state behavior, but constitutes and
reconstitutes state identities.24 Such theories explicitly distance themselves from explanations that rely on instrumental calculations about
the establishment of legitimate domestic governance.25 Two leading
ideational theorists explicitly reject, for example, the argument I shall
introduce later – namely, that governments support human rights regimes
to advance partisan and public interest in preventing domestic violence
and interstate warfare. In a striking historical conjecture, these analysts
assert that in the 1940s and 1950s governments could not possibly have
sought human rights regimes to preserve the ‘‘democratic peace’’ because
such founding moments ‘‘came well before the emergence of the new social knowledge’’ that undemocratic regimes undermine peace – a collective belief they date to research by liberal international relations theorists
in the early 1980s, led by Michael Doyle.26 As we shall soon see, this equation of ‘‘social knowledge’’ with academic political science misstates the
true origins of human rights regimes because it underestimates the ability
of nonacademics to generate a widely accepted, factually grounded – and
ultimately accurate – consensus about world politics.
The ‘‘New Orthodoxy’’: A Curious Convergence
of Realism and Idealism
The study of human rights makes unlikely bedfellows. Although realist
and ideational theories start from very different assumptions, their
predictions about human rights tend to converge. Most existing analyses of human rights regimes rest on an uneasy synthesis of these two
23
24
25

26

Franck 1988.
Jepperson, Wendt, and Katzenstein 1996, 54.
Finnemore and Sikkink 1998. Thomas Risse has sought to take this further by
drawing on Habermasian normative theory as a basis for positive analysis. See Risse
2000.
Keck and Sikkink 1998, 203. See also [fn. 53] and accompanying text in this article.
Compare Helfer and Slaughter 1997, 331–35.

630

International Law and International Relations

explanations. Realists cited earlier tend to argue that human rights norms
are expressions of domestic values, not simply propagandists justifications for the pursuit of national security interests.27 ***
Many in both schools adopt what Robert Keohane has elsewhere
termed the realist ‘‘fall-back’’ position: Public interest groups with
idealistic values, perhaps transnationally organized, shape the underlying
preferences of democratic great powers, which then deploy their preponderant power to construct and enforce international human rights
norms. Idealism explains the position of great powers; realism explains
the spread of norms.28 In generalizing about human rights regimes, for
example, Margaret Keck and Kathryn Sikkink focus extensively on the
transcultural attractiveness of ideas and the density of transnational
organization (ideational factors) and the vulnerability of targets to
sanctions (a realist factor). As we have seen, they explicitly contrast this
explanation, however, with an explanation that focuses on domestic
institutional and material preconditions, which they reject outright (on
theoretical, not empirical grounds) as at most only secondary.29
There is thus considerably more convergence in empirical predictions
about the source of support for human rights regimes than broad
theoretical labels might suggest (see Table 24.1). Most theories, whether
realist or ideational, predict that governments, interest groups, and public opinion in established democratic states spearhead efforts to form
and enforce international human rights regimes – and they induce,
coerce, or persuade others to go join. Yet, as I discuss in more detail later,
this is simply not the case. In postwar Europe, as in the UN during this
period, established democracies consistently opposed reciprocally binding human rights obligations and neither coerced nor persuaded anyone
else to accept them. Before moving on to the empirical analysis, it is
therefore necessary to examine a third explanation for the formation
of human rights regimes.

27

28

29

Even if this were the case, the argument would not be entirely realist, since the claim
that democratic governments are more likely to side with the West does not necessarily
follow from realist theory. Even self-styled realists increasingly concede that societal
preferences play an important, often determinant role in alliance formation. For a criticism of this type of realist degeneration, see Legro and Moravcsik 1999.
Ruggie 1983, 98–99. On this sort of realist fall-back or two-step position more generally,
see Legro 1996; Moravcsik 1997, 543; Keohane 1986, 183; and Legro and Moravcsik
1999.
Keck and Sikkink 1998, 201–209.

631

Supporters are led by
democratic great powers.
The weaker the state, the
less support we observe.

Greater concentration of
power in the hands of
great power democracies.
More cost-effective
coercion or inducement
More cooperation.

Predicted variation
in cooperation

Great powers employ
coercion or inducement to
unilaterally extend national
ideals derived from national
pride or geopolitical
self-interest.
Smaller states defend their
sovereignty.

Predicted national
preferences on
compulsory
commitments

Motivations and
tactics

Realism

Republican liberalism
Governments seek to prevent
domestic oppression and
international conflict
through international
symbols, standards, and
procedures that secure
domestic democracy. They
are constrained by fear that
domestic laws might be
struck down. International
agreement reflects
convergent interests.
Supporters are led by newly
established democracies.
Established democracies
accept only optional or
rhetorical commitments.
Nondemocracies
oppose.
More immediate threats to
democracy.
Greater desire to enhance
domestic stability.
More cooperation.

Ideational theory
Altruistic governments and
groups in established
democracies seek to extend
perceived universal norms.
Less-democratic states are
socialized or persuaded
through existing
transnational networks
(the ‘‘logic of
appropriateness’’).

Supporters are led by societal
groups and governments in
the most democratic states.
The less established the
democracy, the less support
we observe.
More attractive norms, more
salient, more legitimate
exemplars, and the more
established the transnational
networks.
More powerful socialization
effects.
More cooperation.

table 24.1. Establishing Human Rights Regimes: Theories, Causal Mechanisms, and Predictions

632

International Law and International Relations

republican liberalism: democratic peace and
domestic commitment
If realist and ideational explanations view the motivations for establishing human rights regimes as involving international coercion or persuasion, a ‘‘republican liberal’’ explanation views them as resulting from
instrumental calculations about domestic politics.30 In general, republican liberal theories stress the impact of varying domestic political
institutions – in particular, the scope and bias of political representation –
on foreign policy. The most prominent among such theories include
institutional explanations of the ‘‘democratic peace,’’ yet the family of
republican liberal theories offers a far wider range of potential explanations, subsuming theories of the role of cartelized elites and independent militaries in provoking war, and of interest group capture (or the
countervailing delegation of authority to strong executives) in foreign
economic policy.31 In contrast to the idealist theories considered earlier,
which assume that social actors are responsive to external socialization
and often altruistically motivated, republican liberal theories assume that
states are self-interested and rational in their pursuit of (varying) underlying national interests, which reflect in turn variation in the nature of
domestic social pressures and representative institutions.32

30

31
32

Liberal international relations theory focuses on state behavior driven by variation in the
economic interests and conceptions of public goods provision on the part of societal
groups, as well as by the nature of domestic political institutions. The republican liberal
label is appropriate to international relations theory debates, though the concern about
promoting democracy also has elements of ideational liberalism – the strand of liberal
theory based on the tendency to promote domestic provision of public goods (national
identity, political institutions, and legitimate economic redistribution) preferred by
domestic actors. (This differs from idealist theory in the minimal role it accords altruism
or transnational socialization.) On the ideational strand of liberal theory, see Moravcsik
1997; and Van Evera 1990. In American or comparative politics, such an explanation
might be thought of as drawing on public-choice theory, institutionalist theory,
constitutional theory, the theory of delegation, or theories of nested games.
For a discussion on the full range of potential liberal explanations, see Moravcsik 1997.
Liberal international relations theories assume that states behave as rational, unitary
actors in the pursuit of their underlying preferences, though not in the definition of those
preferences. Their theoretical distinctiveness lies in their consistent focus on variation in
national preferences resulting from social pressures for particular material and ideational
interests, as well as the way such interests are represented by state institutions. In this
regard, institutional variants of democratic peace theory and theories of legislativeexecutive relations share common liberal theoretical assumptions. For an elaboration,
see Moravcsik 1997; Doyle 1986; Russett 1993; Snyder 1991; Bailey, Goldstein, and
Weingast 1997; Van Evera 1999; and Legro and Moravcsik 1999.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

633

A useful republican liberal starting point for the problem at hand is
to assume that international institutional commitments, like domestic
institutional commitments, are self-interested means of ‘‘locking in’’
particular preferred domestic policies – at home and abroad – in the
face of future political uncertainty. This presumption, which is not only
consistent with republican liberalism but also draws on theories widely
employed to explain domestic delegation to courts and regulatory authorities in American and comparative politics, treats domestic politics as
a game in which politicians compete to exercise public authority.33
Terry Moe observes that ‘‘most political institutions . . . arise out of
a politics of structural choice in which the winners use their temporary
hold on public authority to design new structures and impose them on
the polity as a whole . . . . [Institutions are] weapons of coercion and
redistribution . . . the structural means by which political winners pursue their own interests, often at the great expense of political losers.’’34
Governments establish courts, administrative agencies, central banks,
and other independent bodies as means by which the winners of political
conflict seek to commit the polity to preferred policies. From this perspective, a rational decision to delegate to an independent body requires
that a sitting government weigh two crosscutting considerations: restricting government discretion and reducing domestic political uncertainty.
Consider first the surrender of national discretion, which in the international context might be termed the sovereignty cost of delegation to an
international authority. All other things equal, governments in power
prefer to maintain short-term discretion to shape collective behavior or
redistribute wealth as they see fit. They are therefore inherently skeptical
of delegation to independent judges or officials, since there is always some
‘‘agency cost’’ to the operation of central banks, administrative agencies,
courts, and other quasi-independent political authorities. Judges, in particular, may seek to negate government actions by nullifying them outright or by failing to enforce them effectively. ***
In the international realm, the defense of governmental discretion translates into the defense of national sovereignty. All other things equal, the
‘‘sovereignty cost’’ of delegating to an international judge is likely to be
even greater than that of delegating to a domestic judge. One reason is that
cross-national variation in the precise nature, scope, application, and enforcement of human rights is likely to be greater than domestic variation.
33
34

Moe 1990.
Ibid., 222, 213. ***

634

International Law and International Relations

*** Particularly for nations without a constitutional court – again, Britain
is a striking example – the procedure marks a significant innovation.35 ***
From this perspective, the defense of ‘‘national sovereignty’’ is, in part, a
legitimate defense of national ideals, political culture, and even democratic practices – a problem of which the framers of post–World War
II human rights documents (and their academic advisers) were quite
aware.36
Why would a national government, democratic or not, ever accept
such external normative and institutional constraints on its sovereignty?
The answer lies in the second major consideration that enters into
a government’s decision whether to delegate to an independent political
body: reducing political uncertainty. In the republican liberal view,
politicians delegate power to human rights regimes, such as domestic
courts and administrative agencies, to constrain the behavior of future
national governments. As Moe explains, a politician must always calculate that ‘‘while the right to exercise public authority happens to be
theirs today, other political actors with different and perhaps opposing
interests may gain that right tomorrow.’’37 To limit the consequences
of this eventuality, government authorities may thus seek to ‘‘lock in’’
favored policies in such a way, thereby insulating them from the actions
of future governments.
From this perspective, human rights norms are expressions of the
self-interest of democratic governments in ‘‘locking in’’ democratic
rule through the enforcement of human rights. By placing interpretation
in the hands of independent authorities managed in part by foreign
governments – in other words, by alienating sovereignty to an international body – governments seek to establish reliable judicial constraints
on future nondemocratic governments or on democratically elected
governments that may seek (as in interwar Italy and Germany) to subvert democracy from within. In the language of international relations
theory, this ‘‘two-level’’ commitment ‘‘ties the hands’’ of future governments, thereby enhancing the credibility of current domestic policies and
institutions.38 Salient and symbolic international constraints serve as
signals to trigger domestic, and perhaps also transnational and international, opposition to any breach of the democratic order. Thus

35
36
37
38

Drzemczewski 1983, 11.
McKeon 1949.
Moe 1990, 227.
Evans, Putnam, and Jacobson 1993.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

635

democratic regimes seek to prevent political retrogression or ‘‘backsliding’’ into tyranny.
The decision of any individual government whether to support a binding international human rights enforcement regime depends, in this view,
on the relative importance of these two basic factors: Sovereignty costs
are weighted against establishing human rights regimes, whereas greater
political stability may be weighted in favor of it. If we assume that the
inconvenience governments face is constant (or randomly distributed), it
follows that a country is most likely to support a human rights regime
when its government is firmly committed to democratic governance but
faces strong internal challenges that may threaten it in the future. Its willingness to tolerate sovereignty costs increases insofar as the costs are outweighed by the benefits of reducing domestic political uncertainty.
If the republican liberal view is correct, the strongest support for binding human rights regimes should come not from established democracies
but from recently established and potentially unstable democracies. ***
*** Less obvious and in striking contrast to realist and idealist
accounts *** is the prediction that dictatorships will be joined in opposition to binding commitments by well-established liberal democracies. By
accepting binding obligations, governments in established democracies
incur an increased, if modest, risk of de facto nullification of domestic laws
without a corresponding increase in the expected stability of domestic
democracy, since the latter is already high. Such governments have good
reason – indeed, a democratically legitimate reason – to reject any reciprocal imposition of international adjudication and enforcement of human
rights claims.
This is not to say that established democracies never have an incentive
to support international human rights instruments. According to republican liberal theory, established democracies have an incentive to promote such arrangements for others – which may involve some small risk of
future pressure on established democracies to deepen their commitment –
in order to bolster the ‘‘democratic peace’’ by fostering democracy in
neighboring countries.39 This is most likely to occur when democratization is expected to pacify a potentially threatening neighbor or solidify
opposition to a common nondemocratic enemy. In such cases, established
democracies can be expected to support rhetorical declarations in favor
39

Russett 1993. This argument is liberal rather than realist, since for realists the domestic
governance of states should make no difference in the perception of threat, whereas for
democratic peace theorists, it does.

636

International Law and International Relations

of human rights and regimes with optional enforcement that bind newly
established democracies but exempt themselves. Yet there is little reason
to believe that this concern will outweigh domestic interests; thus they
are likely to remain opposed to reciprocally enforceable rules.40 Further
observable implications concerning national tactics and confidential
discussions are developed in the next section.

testing the theories: the negotiation of the echr
What light does the negotiating history of the ECHR cast on the power
of these three competing theories? The negotiation of the ECHR took
place between 1949 and 1953 under the auspices of the Council of
Europe. At the first session of the Council of Europe’s Consultative Assembly in September 1949, its legal committee under the chairmanship
of the Frenchman Pierre-Henri Teitgen recommended that an organization be created to ensure adherence to human rights in Europe. ***
Realist, ideational, and liberal institutional theories all offer prima
facie explanations for the general form and timing of the ECHR’s establishment. For realists, this period marked the dawning of an ‘‘American
century’’ and a moment in which the West became embroiled in a bipolar conflict with the Soviet Union. For ideational theorists, it immediately followed the Holocaust, a salient historical event of considerable
moral force, and occurred immediately after the rise to salient Western
leadership of two long-established democratic exemplars, the United
States and the United Kingdom.41 During the immediate postwar period,
republican liberals might observe, a wave of new liberal democracies
emerged (or reemerged) across Western Europe. Nondemocratic institutions were widely viewed as a source of both World War II and the Cold
War, and, accordingly, the democratization of Germany, Italy, and other
West European nations was seen as a guarantee against both a revival of
fascism and the spread of communism.
To assess the relative importance of these three plausible theories, we
therefore require more fine-grained evidence than a simple coincidence
of timing or the existence of occasional public rhetorical justification.
40

41

In theory, one might argue that the incomplete adherence of established democracies
could be expected to undermine the international regime, which could in turn destabilize
newly established democracies and thereby create threats to established democracies. Yet
in practice the signaling function of international norms in any given country does not
appear to depend on the adherence by others to enforcement clauses; certainly this conjecture seems to have played an unimportant role in British or European deliberations.
For a more solidly grounded view, see Helfer and Slaughter 1997, 331–35.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

637

I consider three types of evidence: the cross-national pattern of national
positions, the process of international negotiation, and the direct documentary record of national motivations. ***
Cross-National Variation in National Preferences
* * *
We can measure the willingness of governments to accept binding obligations by examining their position on two related elements of the institutional design of the ECHR – both essential to the future effectiveness
of the regime.
Compulsory jurisdiction: Should the regime mandate that member
states recognize the jurisdiction of an independent international court,
as opposed to a body of foreign ministers?
 Individual petition: Should the regime mandate that member states
grant private individuals and groups standing to file cases?


Since both mandatory binding jurisdiction and individual petition are
required to render a system of international human rights adjudication
effective, a vote for both is defined as support for a reciprocally binding
regime, whereas a vote against either marks opposition.42 ***
To investigate the relationship between democratic governance and
support for binding regimes, we also require a measure of how stable a
democracy is expected to be.43 European political systems involved in the
negotiations can be divided into three categories. The first category,
‘‘established democracies,’’ contains those systems that had been continuously under democratic rule since before 1920 and remained so thereafter: Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. (Occupation is not coded
42

43

Sikkink suggests a less satisfactory coding, one which conflates the domestic and external
concerns of governments in such a way as to greatly exaggerate the relative importance of
the latter. Sikkink 1993. In fact only a miniscule set of ECHR cases have been brought by
one state against another. [Council of Europe 1975, IV/248–52, also 132ff, 242–96, also
I/xxiv, 10–24, 296ff; passim, and V/68–70. By the time the member states negotiated
individual petition, underlying positions were harder to make out, since it was becoming
increasingly clear that such provisions will be optional.]
Conventional political science measures of ‘‘democracy’’ are inappropriate, since such
measures assess institutions’ levels of democracy, not future expectations of democratic
stability. The length of continuous democratic rule is a conventional measure in the literature on the democratic peace and elsewhere for the depth of commitment to
democracy. See, for example, Russett 1993. ***

638

International Law and International Relations

as a suspension of domestic democracy, but the establishment of a nondemocratic domestic regime is – for example, Vichy France) The second
category, ‘‘new democracies,’’ contains those that were firmly established
during the negotiations and remained so thereafter, but only since a point
between 1920 and 1950: Austria, France, Italy, Iceland, Ireland, and
West Germany. The third category, ‘‘semidemocracies and dictatorships,’’
contains the two governments that were not fully democratic by 1950,
because of civil war or internal repression (and did not remain so
thereafter), namely Greece and Turkey. Spain and Portugal, though not
involved in the negotiations, also belong in this category.44
Turning to the findings, we see little evidence of the positive correlation
between support for binding regimes and power or length of democratic
rule predicted by realist and idealist theory. Instead, we observe the
inverse-U-shaped relationship between the stability of democracy and
support for binding human rights commitments predicted by republican liberal theory. Table 24.2 summarizes the findings. [New democracies]
support binding human rights guarantees. In contrast, six of the seven
established democracies join the four transitional governments and nondemocracies in opposing one or both such guarantees (or, in the case of
Luxembourg, abstaining). *** The correlation is so strong that even
recategorization of borderline cases – France and Turkey, say – would not
undermine the striking relationship.
A number of ad hoc conjectures suggested by historians, legal academics, and common intuition about postwar European politics also fall by
the wayside. Opposition appears to be uncorrelated with the possession of
colonies.45 ***
Opposition is similarly uncorrelated with the existence of a strong domestic tradition of parliamentary sovereignty, as some analysts of
Britain conjecture. Many strong supporters – France, Belgium, Italy,
Germany, Austria, Iceland, and Ireland – shared an equally deep tradition of parliamentary sovereignty. Any imputation of causality from
the correlation between postwar support for domestic judicial review
and international enforcement of human rights (say, in the cases of Italy,
Germany, and Austria), furthermore, is very likely to be spurious. *** It is
far more plausible that these countries adopted both domestic and international judicial review because of a strong desire to bolster the democratic order ***. *** [The] establishment of domestic constitutional
44
45

For a further discussion of this coding, see the notes to Table 24.2.
This is the factor most often mentioned in the secondary literature.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

639

table 24.2. Stability of Democratic Governance and National
Positions on the European Convention on Human Rights
Unstable or
nondemocracies
(stable
democracy
not yet clearly
established by
1950)
Supports enforcement
(individual petition
and compulsory
jurisdiction
mandatory)
Opposes enforcement
(individual petition
and/or compulsory
jurisdiction
optional or absent)

a

b

c

d

e

—

Greece,a
Turkey a
(Portugal,d
Spaind)

New democracies
(continuous
democracy only
since a date
between
1920 and
1950)
Austria, France,
Italy, Iceland,
Ireland,
Germanyb
—

Established
democracies
(continuous
democracy
since a
date before
1920)
Belgiumc

Denmark,
Sweden,
Netherlands,
Norway,
United
Kingdom,
Luxembourge

Greece and Turkey are characterized as unstable, whereas Austria, France, Italy, Iceland,
Ireland, and Germany are characterized as new, because (1) it had been less than a year
after conclusion of the bloody Greek civil war, and extra-legal measures were still in force;
and (2) Greek and Turkish democracy were widely viewed as limited by the role of the
military and incomplete judicial autonomy. It is also worth noting that both governments
would subsequently slip back into dictatorship.
Germany, not yet a member of the Council of Europe, did not have voting rights, but participated actively in the negotiations.
Belgium initially hesitated, supporting the convention only with optional clauses, but then
came to favor mandatory enforcement.
Spain and Portugal, both dictatorships, were not members of the Council of Europe. Yet,
in striking contrast to Germany (also not a member), they showed little independent
interest in participating informally, nor were they invited to do so.
In some the cases, Luxembourg abstained on, rather than opposed enforcement measures.

Subsequent data reanalysis revealed that Belgium should have been coded as ‘‘opposed’’ and
Turkey as ‘‘democratic.’’ This removes one anomaly but creates another. AMM [2005].

review, like the establishment of international human rights guarantees,
is a postauthoritarian phenomenon. ***
Republican liberal theory also seems to offer the most accurate account of the instrumental attitude governments adopted toward more
detailed provisions of the ECHR. Should the convention create, governments asked themselves, an independent court, a quasi-judicial body of

640

International Law and International Relations

government representatives, or no central institution at all? Cleavages
around this issue were similar to those around compulsory jurisdiction
and individual petition, with opponents of effective enforcement opposing the court.46 Governments favorable to binding human rights adjudication proposed that the members of the intermediary Commission on
Human Rights be nominated by the court – a clear effort to render international institutions more independent – whereas more skeptical
governments favored granting power of nomination to the intergovernmental Committee of Ministers.47
* * *
The Domestic and International Decision-Making Process
Realism, ideational theory, and republican liberalism also generate distinctive predictions about the tactics likely to be most salient in interstate negotiations. Realist theory, with its stress on interstate power and
deep conflicts of interest, leads us to expect to observe attempts by great
powers to coerce or bribe weaker states to change their policies. Ideational
theory, by contrast, leads us to expect to observe attempts by governments
or transnational groups in civil society to engage in transnational persuasion. Such persuasion may suffice in itself or may be a prelude to subsequent coercive tactics. For liberal theorists, by contrast, there is little
reason to expect governments to alter their views on fundamental issues
such as the nature of constitutional adjudication in light of threats, promises, or normative persuasion by other democratic governments. ***
Published documents contain very little direct confirmation of either the
realist or ideational predictions. No great power or long-standing democracy appears to have made threats or offered inducements to secure
stronger commitments. The most important powers engaged in Western
Europe at the time, the United States and the United Kingdom, were
respectively absent or opposed. Ideational theorists might point out that the
‘‘European Movement,’’ working through the Assembly of the Council of
Europe, was engaged in transnational discussion and mobilization. Certainly many leading advocates of the convention were European federalists
and viewed the ECHR as a step toward European integration.48 Yet there is
46
47
48

Council of Europe 1975, IV/248–50.
Council of Europe 1975, 111/268–70.
Some Jewish parliamentarians and law professors were also prominent and may have
been influenced by their experiences and beliefs.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

641

little evidence that a shared transnational discourse influenced the
positions of parliamentary politicians in the assembly, let alone representatives of national governments. ***
Instead the preponderance of evidence concerning negotiating tactics
confirms republican liberal predictions. Rather than seeking to coerce
or persuade one another, or mobilizing groups in civil society, national
governments conducted a classical international negotiation. Governments focused primarily on practical compromises that would assure that
the system functioned to assure each state its preferred level of sovereign
control. New institutions were modified to a compromise close to the
lowest common denominator, with no government forced to accept
immediate constraints on its own policies significantly greater than those
it ideally sought. Where there was discord, optional clauses afforded
governments flexibility. ***
Domestic Deliberation and Public Justification
The final type of evidence consists of the records of confidential deliberations and public justifications by national decision-makers, drawn from
debates in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, negotiating sessions among the national governments, and the documentary
record of confidential deliberations in one critical country where such
documents are available, namely the United Kingdom. ***
*** Not a single piece of documentary evidence in the sources I have
been able to consult supports the realist prediction that governments
impose international human rights norms through threats of external coercion or inducement. At no point do we observe governments weighing
the costs and benefits of coercion, concerning themselves with the distribution of power capabilities, or mentioning foreign or military aid.
There is slightly more evidence for the ideational view, but not
enough to establish any confidence in its veracity. At most, NGOs and
public opinion appear to have played a secondary, even insignificant,
role.49 The rhetoric of politicians in the European Assembly, as well as
some interest groups, invoked moral considerations. Yet for the ideational theory to be confirmed, such statements must be designed to socialize or persuade national governments by appealing to respect for
human rights as an end in itself, rather than as an instrument to promote
49

For a similar conclusion regarding the abolition of the slave trade, see Kaufman and Pape
1999.

642

International Law and International Relations

concrete ends of enduring interest to member governments – the prevention of tyranny, genocide, and aggression. There is no evidence of
this; positions, as we have seen, do not change. ***
The overwhelming bulk of the documentary evidence confirms instead
the republican liberal account. By far the most consistent public justification for the ECHR, to judge from debates in the Council of Europe Constituent Assembly, was that it might help combat domestic threats from
the totalitarian right and left, thereby stabilizing domestic democracy
and preventing international aggression. (It is helpful to remember that
both Hitler and Mussolini came to power, at least initially, by constitutional means.) Teitgen, the chief French advocate of the ECHR in the
assembly, considered ‘‘Fascism, Hitlerism, and Communism’’ as the major
postwar threats to democracy.50 Governments, Teitgen argued, should
seek to ‘‘prevent – before it is too late – any new member who might be
threatened by a rebirth of totalitarianism from succumbing to the influence of evil, as has already happened in conditions of general apathy.
It is not enough to possess freedom; positive action must be taken to
defend it . . . . Would Fascism have triumphed in Italy if, after the
assassination of Matteoti, this crime had been subjected to an international trial?’’51 Yet postwar human rights regimes were a response not
simply to the recent fascist past but also to the prospect of a Communist
future. The latter was mentioned just as often. In this period, we must
recall, the French Communist Party enjoyed plurality electoral support. Teitgen spoke of the ‘‘abominable temptation’’ to ‘‘exchange . . .
freedom for a little more bread.’’52
*** This *** refutes the conjecture – which, as we have seen, Sikkink
and Keck treat as an essential piece of evidence for ideational theory – that
few analysts before the 1980s could possibly have been aware of a link
between democracy and peace. In many ways the democratic peace
proposition, which dates from the eighteenth century, was a central tenet,
arguably the central tenet, of postwar Western planning, as it had been in
the thinking of Woodrow Wilson and other liberal statesmen a generation
before.53
Yet domestic self-interest dominated. The most explicit justifications
for the ECHR as a bulwark against future tyranny were advanced not
50
51

52
53

Council of Europe 1975, I/40–42.
Council of Europe 1975, I/192, 120, 64, also 60–64, for statements by others, I/66, 84,
120ff, 192–94, 276, 278–80, 292.
Council of Europe 1975, I/40–42.
Keck and Sikkink 1998, 203. Compare footnote 26. See Moravcsik 1992 and 1997.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

643

by representatives from countries with the longest democratic heritage
but, as republican liberal theory predicts, by those from newly established democracies. Among the most persistent advocates of this
position were Italian and German representatives. *** A German representative went further, proposing a treaty obliging all member states to
come to each other’s aid, apparently with force, if domestic freedom were
threatened.54
Yet the primary expectation was not that the regime would strengthen
democracy by mobilizing intervention by foreign governments to enforce
human rights norms, as realist and some ideational theory might lead
us to expect. Nor did governments stress active transnational mobilization. Most participants appear to have felt that domestic politics would
remain the primary site of enforcement – all members were to be democracies, at least formally – with international controls serving as an external signaling device to trigger an appropriate domestic response.55 The
ECHR was intended primarily to strengthen existing domestic institutions
of judicial review, parliamentary legislation, and public action, not to
supplant them. ***
*** The arrangement was primarily a means to prevent backsliding
by new democracies. As Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe of the United Kingdom
put it: ‘‘In answer to the criticism that, as signatories will be limited to
democratic states the Convention is unnecessary . . . our plan has the
advantage of being immediately practicable; it provides a system of
collective security against tyranny and oppression.’’56
Unlike the UN system, the ECHR was designed to be enforceable –
a goal, Maxwell-Fyfe argued, that was realistic only because all of
its members already shared an essentially democratic political culture.57
[The United Kingdom is a critical case.] Opposition by the oldest and
most firmly established democracy in Europe constitutes a particularly
striking disconfirmation of realist and ideational theory.58 The British,
as we have seen, supported international declaratory norms but firmly

54
55
56
57
58

Ibid., V/328–30, 336–40.
Lester 1994, 4–5. See also Teitgen 1988, 482.
Council of Europe 1975, I/120.
See ibid., I/50–52; and Teitgen 1988, 488.
The UK position was also viewed as decisive. See, for example, Paul-Henri Spaak, cited
in Teitgen 1988, 478. Britain is also a country for which we have a wealth of reliable
archival documents and oral histories. I have restricted myself here to materials found
in published sources.

644

International Law and International Relations

opposed any attempt to establish binding legal obligations, centralized
institutions, individual petition, or compulsory jurisdiction.59 ***
What issues were raised in confidential British deliberations? The
secondary literature on British human rights policy makes much of two
British concerns: the fear that residents of British colonies and dependencies might invoke the ECHR, and aversion to European federalism.
To judge from confidential discussions, however, neither appears to have
been a dominant concern. *** [Overall] there is surprisingly little
discussion of colonial implications in the deliberations – certainly far less
than purely of domestic considerations. Colonial Office concerns appear to
have been isolated and intermittent. In any case, a colonial clause in the
ECHR would limit any such claims, and consideration of such a clause did
not blunt British opposition.60 ***
Confidential domestic deliberations suggest instead that British opposition reflected what A. Maxwell, permanent secretary to the Home
Office, described as ‘‘grave apprehension about what might happen at
home.’’61 When the issue finally reached the Cabinet, the attention of
ministers – after brief mention of colonial and economic concerns – seems
to have focused on domestic application. Precisely as republican liberal
theory predicts, the primary concern was not the vulnerability of the
overall British record on human rights. As Parliamentary Secretary for
Foreign Affairs Hector McNeil observed in a 1947 memo to Prime
Minister Clement Atlee, Britain had an ‘‘extremely good record.’’ British
decision-makers appear sincerely to have believed that Britain would
be less inconvenienced by reciprocal commitment than other member
governments. The definition of rights in the convention was, so the
Foreign Office memo to the Cabinet in 1950 concluded, ‘‘consistent with
our existing law in all but a small number of comparatively trivial
cases.’’62
* * *

59
60

61
62

Marston 1993, 799–800.
Marston 1993, 806–807, 809–10, 812, 816. In 1953 the British government voluntarily
extended the Convention to the forty-two overseas territories for whose international
relations they were responsible.
Marston 1993, 813.
Marston 1993, 811. With a lack of modesty about their domestic political institutions
characteristic of this period, British officials and politicians also sometimes cited the
need to set a good example for foreign countries as a reason for Britain to take an active
role in the negotiations.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

645

The specific issue cited most often by the government’s legal authorities
was the British policy toward political extremists. A ministerial brief
referred to a ‘‘blank cheque’’ that would ‘‘allow the Governments to
become the object of such potentially vague charges by individuals as
to invite Communists, crooks, and cranks of every type to bring
actions.’’63 ***
Yet it would be misleading to argue that British institutional idiosyncrasy
caused British opposition. Every established democracy, after all, has its
treasured idiosyncrasies, and British leaders sincerely believed that, as the
cradle of rule-of-law governance, they would suffer least.64 *** For British
decision-makers, the decisive point was not the nature of these concrete
objections but the utter absence in the British domestic context of any
countervailing self-interested argument in favor of membership.
The quaint scenarios of extremist threats raised by British officials
demonstrate this. They arose not because extremist groups in Britain were
particularly strong but because, in comparison with the Continent, they
were so weak. Whereas French, German, and Italian officials viewed the
ECHR as a check on the potential triumph of popular extremist parties,
British officials saw it only as a hindrance to a defense of the political
system against agitation by isolated individuals. British internal debates
and external statements were utterly devoid of any recognition of the
advantages of collective security against domestic extremists – advantages
central to continental arguments for the ECHR. Whereas the French were
concerned that the Communist Party might take power electorally and
have to be checked by the ECHR, the British were concerned that isolated
radicals might file suit under the ECHR. In this context, marginal
inconveniences overridden elsewhere in the interest of bolstering democratic stability became fundamental obstacles to the acceptance of binding international human rights norms.
For these reasons, the British government long considered opposing
the convention altogether. Yet, in the words of an internal Foreign

63
64

Marston 1993, 806.
It is possible they were wrong. One intriguing conjecture is that the longer a democratic
form of government is in place, the more attached to its idiosyncrasies citizens and elites
are likely to grow, and the further from the norm of international constitutionalism its
practices are likely to become. Hence we would expect countries such as Britain, the
Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States to become particularly attached to their
idiosyncratic national systems. If correct, this would mean that established democracies
not only reap fewer benefits from international human rights enforcement but also bear
greater costs.

646

International Law and International Relations

Office paper, ‘‘The alternative, namely refusal to become a party to a
Convention acceptable to nearly all the remaining States of the Council
of Europe, would appear to be almost indefensible . . . . Political considerations, both domestic and foreign, compel us now to bring ourselves
to accept’’ an (optional) right of individual petition.65 What blunted
British opposition to any postwar European human rights regime was,
above all, the fear of resurgent totalitarianism abroad that might pose an
eventual military threat to the United Kingdom – precisely as republican
liberal theory predicts.66 This fear reflected not just a concern with
a resurgence of Fascism, but also a turnaround in British foreign policy in
1948 in response to the perceived rise of the Communist threat in Western
Europe. The West, the government argued, needed not only to maintain
the military balance but also to strengthen continental democracies.
* * *
Having secured concessions, which essentially rendered the convention unenforceable in Britain, the cabinet unanimously accepted the desirability of signing it.
* * *

generalizing the argument: human rights and beyond
We have seen that the origins of the ECHR, the most successful international human rights adjudication and enforcement regime in the world
today, lies not in coercive power politics or socialization to idealistic
norms, as contemporary international relations theories predict. Instead
its origins lie in self-interested efforts by newly established (or reestablished) democracies to employ international commitments to consolidate
democracy – ‘‘locking in’’ the domestic political status quo against their
nondemocratic opponents. This empirical finding has three broader implications for future research on domestic politics and international relations.
The Origin and Evolution of Human Rights Regimes
The first implication of the theoretical argument is that the tendency of
states to enhance the credibility of domestic policies by binding themselves
65

66

W. E. Beckett, Legal Advisor to the Foreign Office, April 1947 Foreign Office meeting,
cited in Marston 1993, 798, 811, also 798–804.
Note that this differs from the realist account in that the threat is not, in the first instance,
a function of military power, but of political and ideological difference.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

647

to international institutions may help explain the origins and evolution of
human rights enforcement regimes more generally. In negotiations to create the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights, the UN Covenants,
and the emergent African human rights system, we should expect to see
a similar pattern of support from new democracies, suspicion from
established democracies, and hostility from dictatorships.67 In the following overview I highlight suggestive evidence and propose areas for
future research.
The negotiation of the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appears to illustrate the dynamics of democratic commitment. At the
height of the Cold War, in the early 1950s, the most stable among modern
democracies, including the United States and the United Kingdom, allied
with authoritarian and totalitarian states like the Soviet Union, China,
South Africa, and Iran, in opposition to the inclusion of compulsory,
enforceable commitments. The alliance in favor of such commitments, as
republican liberal theory predicts, included recently established democracies in continental Europe, Latin America, and Asia.
* * *
The positions of the established democracies in recent years concerning
the creation of war crimes tribunals offer at least partial confirmation of
republican liberal theory. Established democracies had little difficulty
accepting tribunals with jurisdiction over the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, where their own policies would not be implicated. Yet where
commitments were (de facto) reciprocally binding – namely, in open-ended
institutional commitments involving countries that actually engage in
foreign intervention – established democracies, confident that they maintain adequate domestic safeguards against domestic atrocities, hesitated
to accept international constraints. In the recent International Criminal
Court negotiations, three established democracies with a recent history of
intervention abroad (the United States, France, and Israel) posed the
greatest difficulties. After fighting to dilute the obligations of the treaty,
the United States and Israel joined China and highly repressive Middle
Eastern and North African states in opposition, while France was the
very last major power to lend its support to the treaty.68

67
68

For an overview, see Robertson and Merrills 1996.
For a general treatment of war crimes tribunals demonstrating the unwillingness of
established democracies to pay high costs, see Bass 1999.

648

International Law and International Relations

What about the development of human rights regimes over time? An
understanding of major human rights regimes does not end with their
founding. We have seen that the ECHR, like other major human rights
instruments, created a number of optional clauses on individual petition
and compulsory jurisdiction of the court. In some cases, early opponents
of an enforceable convention remained exceptionally recalcitrant.69 Yet
over the subsequent five decades, all West European governments progressively adopted such clauses and in many cases incorporated the
ECHR into domestic law.
Much of this accords with republican liberal theory. We observe
a strengthening of commitments during and immediately after ‘‘democratic waves’’ – as hit Latin America and Central Europe during the
1990s. Such efforts are strongly favored by new democracies.70 In
Europe, the most important reform in the history of the ECHR, for
example, was launched in the early to mid-1990s. ‘‘Protocol 11,’’ opened
for signature in May 1994, permits the ECHR Court to assume the
functions of the commission and compels all new signatories to accept
compulsory jurisdiction and individual petition – practices already universal among the original members. Leading legal academics argue that
the most important impetus for Protocol 11 was ‘‘the widening . . . to
include [states] that have had little domestic, much less international,
experience in the legal protection of human rights.’’71 The first three
countries to ratify Protocol 11 were three transitional democracies:
Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Slovenia. The governments of some new democracies in Central and East Europe were similarly quick to accept minority
rights obligations as a means of locking in domestic democracy.72 In the
Americas, acceptance of compulsory jurisdiction by the Inter-American
Court has occurred over the past two decades – a period in which
domestic constitutional review also became nearly universal. In contrast,

69

70

71
72

Sweden and the Netherlands are among the handful of countries that have been specifically ordered by the ECHR to allow more effective domestic judicial review of human
rights claims; many have argued that Britain should be on the list as well. Lester 1994.
Huntington 1991. Consider, however, former British colonies, which on gaining independence adopted explicit bills of rights and constitutional review – some on their own,
some with the encouragement of the British government. Many were patterned after
the European Convention, but the underlying impetus stems, republican liberal theory argues, from their status as emerging postauthoritarian democracies. Some of the
most stable of these, such as those in the Caribbean, rejected international obligations.
Janis, Kay, and Bradley 1995, 88–89, 113–18.
See Manas 1996; and Wippman 1999.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

649

human rights norms remain weak in those regions where new democracies are few, as in Africa or the Middle East.
Despite these important insights, however, the determinants of the
evolution of human rights regimes are unlikely to be identical to the
determinants of their founding and are therefore unlikely to be explained
entirely by republican liberal theory. The ECHR deepened over a period
during which European governments grew more confident about the
stability of domestic democratic governance. Hence the theory advanced
here cannot be the sole, or even the major, explanation for the subsequent
deepening of the regime. A social process intervenes between original
intent and ultimate evolution – a process, we have seen, of which governments were quite aware in 1950. British officials believed that the
ECHR would alter domestic political arrangements so as to encourage the
mobilization of new social demands for human rights enforcement.
Republican liberal theory would suggest that such new demands reflect
new opportunities for representation of social interests once a nation
joins a regime; broader liberal theory would stress changes in social ideas
and interests. Further research is required to clarify the precise dynamics
of such long-term trends.73
Generalizing the Theory to Other Issue Areas
A second direction for future research is to extend the theory to cooperation in other issue areas. Despite the ‘‘republican liberal’’ label, the
theoretical distinctiveness of the explanation advanced here is only
incidentally connected to the liberal content of the philosophy embodied
in human rights regimes. In other words, the argument is theoretically
rather than substantively liberal.74 Distinct to republican liberal theory
is the decisive role of domestic political representation in world politics
and, by extension, the possibility that international institutions, like
their domestic counterparts, can enhance the credibility of domestic political commitments, thereby ‘‘locking in’’ current policies. Whether or
not governments are ‘‘liberal,’’ international institutions may ‘‘strengthen
the state’’ domestically by expanding its domestic control over initiative,
information, ideas, and institutions.75 ***

73
74
75

Moravcsik 1995.
Moravcsik 1997.
Moravcsik 1994.

650

International Law and International Relations

Under what general conditions should we expect to observe international commitments of this kind? Republican liberal theory suggests three
conditions: (1) governments fear future domestic political uncertainty,
(2) the position of the national government is supported by a consensus
of foreign governments, and (3) international cooperation helps induce
domestic actors to support the maintenance of current policies.
Where else in world politics might these three conditions be met? Two
types of examples must suffice. Where nondemocratic governments
cooperate to enhance their domestic credibility, a mirror image of human
rights institutions may arise. Stephen David argues that ‘‘weak and
illegitimate’’ leaders of developing countries often view internal enemies
as more dangerous than external ones and are therefore likely to select
international alliances that undermine domestic opponents.76 The Holy
Alliance is a nineteenth-century example of international cooperation
designed to block the seemingly inevitable spread of domestic liberalism
and nationalism – inside and outside its membership. ***
Further examples of efforts to use international regimes to bolster
domestic policy credibility are found in international trade and monetary
policy.77 Mexico, for example, in exchange for its commitment to the
North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA), gained relatively few
economic concessions from the United States and Canada. This has led
many analysts to argue that NAFTA should be seen less as a quid pro quo
and more as a means of establishing the credibility of the Mexican
commitment to trade and economic liberalization against the future potential of backsliding.78 Mexican reform within NAFTA was just such
a case where the three conditions were met: policy credibility was questionable, the consensus among foreign governments (the United States
and Canada) was closer to the views of the domestic (Mexican) government than those of Mexican protectionists, and the costs of unilateral
defection were perceived as large.
The process of European integration rested similarly on centralizing
power in national executives, who consistently employed ‘‘foreign policy’’
decision-making institutions to handle issues traditionally decided in
‘‘domestic’’ forums.79 *** In European monetary cooperation, weakcurrency countries like France and Italy have been among the strongest

76
77
78
79

David 1991.
Rodrik 1989.
For example, Haggard 1997.
See Moravcsik 1994; and Goldstein 1996.

The Origins of Human Rights Regimes

651

proponents of deeper exchange-rate cooperation – often with the intention of using external policy to stabilize domestic macroeconomic policy
and performance ***, [– and deeper agricultural cooperation – both of
which shifted the perceived costs of defection.80]
Realism and Idealism in International Relations Theory
The third and broadest implication of this analysis is that it counsels
caution about the uncritical acceptance of certain ideational explanations
for the emergence of international norms. Recent scholarship has been
quick to assume that if realist (or regime) theory fails to explain international cooperation – say, in areas like human rights and environmental policy – the motivation for cooperation must lie in ideational
socialization to altruistic beliefs. This assumption, once termed ‘‘idealist’’
or ‘‘utopian,’’ seems plausible at first glance. ***
Yet scholars should not jump too quickly to the conclusion – as many
recent studies of foreign aid, arms control, slavery, racism, and human
rights invite them to do – that altruism must motivate the establishment
of morally attractive international norms.81 The tendency to jump to this
conclusion demonstrates the danger of conducting debates about world
politics around the simple dichotomy of realism versus idealism (or
realism versus constructivism), as seems the current norm.82 Presumptive
evidence for the importance of altruistic or ‘‘principled’’ motivations
vis-a`-vis a realist account may melt away, as we have seen, as soon as the
underlying theory is tested against more sophisticated rationalist, yet
nonrealist (in this case, liberal) theories of self-interested political behavior. Moreover, to establish methodologically the existence of altruistic
motivations and socialization processes, rather than alternative liberal
theories, one must do more than cite public professions of idealism,
document the actions of moral entrepreneurs, or invoke the desirability
of the ultimate end. Talk and even mobilization are often cheap and
often redundant or futile; accordingly, such evidence is often misleading.
80

81

82

See Frieden 1993; Collins 1988; Moravcsik 1998a, chap. 4, 6; and Krugman 1994,
189–94.
What drives cooperation is prior domestic institutional convergence. Hence the nature of
domestic regimes is not an intermediate variable between fundamental socialization and
state behavior but the critical variable that determines the nature of interdependence in
the first place.
This is a view ideational theorists are coming to accept. Finnemore and Sikkink 1998,
916–17.

652

International Law and International Relations

Cross-national comparison and primary-source documentation of decision making are the critical tests.
In the case of the establishment of the ECHR, the proper theory and
method reverses an idealist conclusion that might appear to offer a
plausible alternative to realism.83 What seems at first to be a conversion
to moral altruism is in fact an instrumental calculation of how best to lock
in democratic governance against future opponents – a practice hardly
distinct from similar practices in the most pecuniary areas of world
politics, such as trade and monetary policy. I am not denying, of course,
that ideas and ideals matter in foreign policy; I am challenging only
a particular idealist argument. Surely some domestic support for democratic governance may be ideological, even idealistic, in origin. But if we
can learn a single lesson from the formation of the world’s most successful
formal arrangement for international human rights enforcement, it is
that in world politics pure idealism begets pure idealism – in the form
of parliamentary assemblies and international declarations. To establish
binding international commitments, much more is required.
83

For example, Legro and Moravcsik 1999.

25
Regime Design Matters: Intentional Oil Pollution
and Treaty Compliance
Ronald B. Mitchell

Too many people assume, generally without having given any serious
thought to its character or its history, that international law is and always
has been a sham. Others seem to think that it is a force with inherent
strength of its own. . . . Whether the cynic or sciolist is the less helpful is
hard to say, but both of them make the same mistake. They both assume
that international law is a subject on which anyone can form his opinions
intuitively, without taking the trouble, as one has to do with other subjects,
to inquire into the relevant facts.
—J. L. Brierly

Regime design matters.1 International treaties and regimes have value
if and only if they cause people to do things they would not otherwise do.
*** [Whether] a treaty elicits compliance or other desired behavioral changes depends upon identifiable characteristics of the regime’s

1

This article summarizes the arguments made in Ronald B. Mitchell, Intentional Oil
Pollution at Sea: Environmental Policy and Treaty Compliance (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, forthcoming).

The research reported herein was conducted with support from the University of Oregon
and the Center for Science and International Affairs of Harvard University. Invaluable
data were generously provided by Clarkson Research Studies, Ltd. The article has benefited
greatly from discussions with Abram Chayes, Antonia Chayes, William Clark, and Robert
Keohane and from collaboration with Moira McConnell and Alexei Roginko as part of
a project on regime effectiveness based at Dartmouth College and directed by Oran Young
and Marc Levy. John Odell, Miranda Schreurs, David Weil, and two anonymous
reviewers provided invaluable comments on earlier drafts of this article. The epigraph is
from J. L. Brierly, The Outlook for International Law (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1944),
pp. 1–2.

653

654

International Law and International Relations

compliance systems.2 As negotiators incorporate certain rules into a
regime and exclude others, they are making choices that have crucial
implications for whether or not actors will comply.
For decades, nations have negotiated treaties with simultaneous hope
that those treaties would produce better collective outcomes and skepticism about the ability to influence the way governments or individuals
act. Both lawyers and political scientists have theorized about how
international legal regimes can influence behavior and why they often do
not.3 ***
[Researchers interested in compliance] face two critical questions. First,
given that power and interests play important roles in determining
behavior at the international level, is any of the compliance we observe
with international treaties the result of the treaty’s influence? Second, if
treaties and regimes can alter behavior, what strategies can those who
negotiate and design regimes use to elicit the greatest possible compliance?
This article addresses both these questions by empirically evaluating the
international regime controlling intentional oil pollution. Numerous
efforts to increase the regime’s initially low levels of compliance provide
data for comparing the different strategies for eliciting compliance within
a common context that holds many important explanatory variables
constant. The goal of the treaties underlying this regime has been to reduce
intentional discharges of waste oil by tankers after they deliver their
cargoes. Since the late 1970s, these treaties have established two quite
different compliance systems, or ‘‘subregimes,’’ to accomplish this goal.
One has prohibited tanker operators from discharging oil in excess of
specified limits. The other has required tanker owners to install expensive
pollution-reduction equipment by specified dates. Treaty parties viewed
both subregimes as equally legitimate and equally binding. * The two
subregimes regulated similar behavior by the same nations and tankers
over the same time period. The absence of differences in power and
interests would suggest that compliance levels with the two subregimes
would be quite similar. * According to collective action theory, these cases
are among the least likely to provide support for the hypothesis that regime
2

3

*** [Oran Young,] Compliance and Public Authority: A Theory with International
Applications (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979), p. 3.
See, for example, Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes, ‘‘On Compliance,’’
International Organization 47 (Spring 1993), pp. 175–205; Young, Compliance
and Public Authority; Roger Fisher, Improving Compliance with International Law
(Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1981); and W. E. Butler, ed., Control
over Compliance with International Law (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991).

Regime Design Matters

655

design matters: subregime provisions required the powerful and concentrated oil industry to incur large pollution control costs to provide diffuse
benefits to the public at large.4 Indeed, the lower cost of complying with
discharge limits would suggest that compliance would be higher with those
limits than with equipment requirements.
*** [Violations] of the limits on discharges have occurred frequently,
attesting to the ongoing incentives to violate the agreement and confirming
the characterization of oil pollution as a difficult collaboration problem.5 A puzzle arises, however, from the fact that contrary to expectation
compliance has been all but universal with requirements to install expensive equipment that provided no economic benefits. *** [The] significant
variance across subregimes can only be explained by specific differences
in subregime design. *** [The] equipment subregime succeeded by
ensuring that actors with incentives to comply with, monitor, and enforce
the treaty were provided with the practical ability and legal authority to
conduct those key implementation tasks. *** [The] regime elicited
compliance when it developed integrated compliance systems that
succeeded in increasing transparency, providing for potent and credible
sanctions, reducing implementation costs to governments by building on
existing infrastructures, and preventing violations rather than merely
deterring them.

compliance theory and definitions
Explaining the puzzle of greater compliance with a more expensive and
economically inefficient international regulation demands an understanding of existing theories about *** compliance in international affairs.
Realists have inferred a general inability of international regimes to
influence behavior from the fact that the international system is
4

5

Michael McGinnis and Elinor Ostrom, ‘‘Design Principles for Local and Global
Commons,’’ Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Bloomington, Ind.,
March 1992, p. 21. Olson’s argument that small groups supply public goods more often
than large groups assumes that group members benefit from providing the good, which
is not true in the oil pollution case; see Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action:
Public Goods and the Theory of Groups (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1965), p. 34.
See Arthur A. Stein, Why Nations Cooperate: Circumstance and Choice in International
Relations (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1990); and Robert Axelrod and Robert
O. Keohane, ‘‘Achieving Cooperation Under Anarchy: Strategies and Institutions,’’ in
Kenneth Oye, ed., Cooperation Under Anarchy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1986).

656

International Law and International Relations

characterized by anarchy and an inability to organize centralized enforcement. *** [‘‘Considerations of power rather than of law determine
compliance.’’6] *** Treaties are epiphenomenal: they reflect power and
interests but do not shape behavior.
This view does not imply that noncompliance is rare ***. Although
nations will violate rules whenever they have both the incentives and
ability to do so, *** ‘‘the great majority of the rules of international law
are generally observed by all nations.’’7 For the realist, behavior frequently
conforms to treaty rules because both the behavior and the rules reflect
the interests of powerful states. More specifically, compliance [arises
because:] (1) a hegemonic state *** induces other states to comply; (2) the
treaty rules codify the parties’ existing behavior or expected future
behavior; or (3) the treaty resolves a coordination game in which no
party has any incentive to violate the rules. ***
Treaty rules correlate with but do not cause compliance. Therefore,
efforts to improve treaty rules to increase compliance reflect either the
changed interests of powerful states or are misguided exercises in futility.
The strength of this view has led to considerable attention being paid to
whether rules influence behavior and far less being paid to design
features that explain why one rule influences behavior and another
does not.
In contrast, international lawyers and institutionalists contend that
the anarchic international order need not lead *** to nations violating
agreements whenever doing so suits them. Other forces – such as transparency, reciprocity, accountability, and regime-mindedness – allow
regimes to impose significant constraints on international behavior under
the right conditions.8 Implicit in the institutionalist view is the assumption
*** [that a given constellation of power and interests] leaves room for
nations to choose among treaty rules that will elicit different levels of
6

7
8

Hans Joachim Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace,
5th ed. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978), p. 299. See also Kenneth Waltz, Theory of
International Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1979), p. 204;
and Susan Strange, ‘‘Cave! Hie Dragones: A Critique of Regime Analysis,’’ in Stephen D.
Krasner, ed., International Regimes (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1983), pp.
337–54 at p. 338. For a contrasting view, see Young, International Cooperation, p. 62.
Morgenthau, Politics Among Nations, p. 267.
See, for example, Abram Chayes and Antonia Chayes, ‘‘Compliance Without Enforcement: State Behavior Under Regulatory Treaties,’’ Negotiation Journal 7 (July 1991),
pp. 311–30; Young, International Cooperation; Robert O. Keohane, ‘‘Reciprocity in
International Relations,’’ International Organization 40 (Winter 1986), pp. 1–27; and
Krasner, International Regimes.

Regime Design Matters

657

compliance. High compliance levels can be achieved even in difficult
collaboration problems in which incentives to violate are large and ongoing. *** [Institutionalists] do not exclude the possibility that regimes,
rather than mere considerations of power, [can cause] compliance.9
[Is behavior ever any different than it would have been without an
agreement?] If we define ‘‘treaty-induced compliance’’ as behavior that
conforms to a treaty’s rules because of the treaty’s compliance system,
institutionalists view treaty-induced compliance as possible. *** [Realists]
see all compliance as ‘‘coincidental compliance,’’ *** behavior that would
have occurred even without the treaty rules.
The debate between these theories highlights the demands placed on
research that seeks to identify those design characteristics of a regime, if
any, that are responsible for observed levels of compliance. I define
compliance, the dependent variable, as an actor’s behavior that conforms
with an explicit treaty provision. Speaking of compliance with treaty
provisions rather than with a treaty captures the fact that parties may
well comply with some provisions while violating others. A study of
‘‘treaty compliance’’ would aggregate violation of one provision with
compliance with another, losing valuable empirical information.10
Restricting study to the explicit rules in a treaty-based regime allows
the analyst to distinguish compliance from noncompliance in clear
and replicable ways. Obviously, a focus on explicit rules ignores other
potential mechanisms of regime influence, such as norms, principles, and
processes of knowledge creation.11 ***
[This article differentiates] among three parts of any compliance
system: a primary rule system, a compliance information system, and
a noncompliance response system. The primary rule system consists of the
actors, rules, and processes related to the behavior that is the
substantive target of the regime. *** [The] primary rule system determines
the pressures and incentives for compliance and violation. The compliance
9

10

11

See, for example, Louis Henkin, How Nations Behave: Law and Foreign Policy (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1979), p. 47; Young, International Cooperation, p. 62;
and Chayes and Chayes, ‘‘Compliance Without Enforcement,’’ p. 31.
At the extreme, if all parties violated treaty provision A and complied with treaty
provision B, they could all be classified as in partial compliance, ignoring the important
variance incompliance rates.
See Haas, Keohane, and Levy, Institutions for the Earth; George W. Downs and David M.
Rocke, Tacit Bargaining, Arms Races, and Arms Control (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1990); Charles Lipson, ‘‘Why Are Some International Agreements
Informal?’’ International Organization 45 (Autumn 1991), pp. 495–538; and Chayes and
Chayes, ‘‘On Compliance,’’ pp. 188–92.

658

International Law and International Relations

information system consists of the actors, rules, and processes that collect,
analyze, and disseminate information on instances of violations and
compliance. [The] compliance information system *** determines the
amount, quality, and uses made of data on compliance and enforcement.
The noncompliance response system consists of the actors, rules, and
processes governing the formal and informal responses *** employed to
induce those in noncompliance to comply. *** These categories provide
the framework used in *** this article to evaluate the oil pollution regime’s
sources of success and failure in its attempt to elicit compliance.

two subregimes for international oil
pollution control
For most people, oil pollution conjures up images of tanker accidents
such as that of the Exxon Valdez.12 *** [Although] oil from such
accidents poses a concentrated but localized hazard to the marine
environment, the waste oil traditionally generated during normal oil
transport has posed a more diffuse but ubiquitous threat. After a tanker
delivers its cargo, a small fraction of oil remains onboard, adhering to
cargo tank walls. Ballasting and tank-cleaning procedures mixed this oil –
averaging about 300 tons per voyage – with seawater, creating slops.
These in turn were most easily and cheaply disposed of by discharging them overboard while at sea. * By the 1970s, the intentional
discharges made on thousands of tanker voyages were putting an
estimated million tons of oil into the oceans annually.13 [The impact of
these chronic but low-concentration discharges and that of accidents on
seabirds and resort beaches have produced regular international efforts
at regulation.] *
Intentional oil discharges were one of the first pollutants to become
the subject of an international regulatory regime.14 In the International

12

13

14

The Exxon Valdez wrecked in Prince William Sound, Alaska, on 24 March 1989,
[spilling thirty five-thousand tons of oil.]
National Academy of Sciences, Petroleum in the Marine Environment (Washington,
D.C. National Academy of Sciences, 1975). See also National Academy of Sciences and
National Research Council, Oil in the Sea: Inputs, Fates, and Effects (Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1985).
For the history of oil pollution control from the 1920s through the 1970s, see Sonia Zaide
Pritchard, Oil Pollution Control (London: Croom Helm, 1987); for a history from the 1950s
through the 1970s, see R. Michael M’Gonigle and Mark W. Zacher, Pollution, Politics, and
International Law: Tankers at Sea (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979).

Regime Design Matters

659

Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Seas by Oil (OILPOL)
of 1954, nations addressed the coastal oil pollution problem by limiting
the oil content of discharges made near shore.15 [Numerous regulatory
revisions have been negotiated] within diplomatic conferences sponsored
by the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO)
or within its committees and those of its successor, the International
Maritime Organization (IMO). By the late 1970s, the regime’s major
provisions, now contained in the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), consisted of restrictions on
both tanker operations and tanker equipment that relied on quite different compliance systems.16 Although rule-making has remained consistently international, governments and nonstate actors have played crucial
roles in the implementation and enforcement of the regime: tanker
owners and operators have been the targets of the regulations while
maritime authorities, classification societies, insurers, and shipbuilders
have monitored and enforced the regulations.

The Discharge Subregime
[MARPOL’S discharge subregime] evolved from the initial regulations of
1954. That agreement constituted a compromise between the United
Kingdom – which wielded strong power in oil markets but had strong
environmental nongovernmental organizations pushing it to reduce
coastal pollution – and Germany, the Netherlands, the United States, and
other major states that viewed any regulation as either environmentally
unnecessary or as harmful to their *** shipping interests. Although the
United Kingdom had sought to restrict tanker discharges throughout the
ocean, the final agreement limited the oil content of discharges made within
fifty miles of any coastline to 100 parts oil per million parts water
(100 ppm). In 1962, the British pushed through an amendment

15

16

‘‘International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil,’’ 12 May
1954, Treaties and Other International Agreements Series (TIAS), no. 4900
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, 1954).
See International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), 2
November 1973, reprinted in International Legal Materials (ILM), vol. 12 (Washington,
D.C.: American Society of International Law, 1973), p. 1319 (hereafter cited by
abbreviation, volume, and year); and Protocol of 1978 Relating to the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 17 February 1978, reprinted in
ILM, vol. 17, 1978, p. 1546 (hereafter cited together as MARPOL 73/78).

660

International Law and International Relations

applying this 100 ppm standard to discharges made by new tankers
regardless of their distance from shore.
The principle underlying the 1962 amendment – that crude oil could
float far enough that discharge zones would not effectively protect coastlines – had gained sufficient support by 1969 that nations agreed to limit
discharges by all tankers throughout the ocean. The pressure to amend
the 1954/62 agreement came from two different sources. On one side,
the thirty-five million gallons of oil spilled by the grounding of the Torrey
Canyon off Britain and France [in 1967] and growing environmentalism,
especially in the United States, supported a push for stronger regulations.17
The previously resistant United States replaced the United Kingdom as
the leading activist state and especially sought to ensure that amendments
would address the growing evidence of enforcement problems ***.
On the other side, oil companies rightly interpreted the 1962 amendments as a wake-up call that discharge standards would soon be replaced
by expensive equipment requirements. In response, Shell Marine International developed and promoted an operational means by which tankers
could reduce oil discharges without *** new equipment.18 The load-ontop procedure (LOT) involved consolidating ballast and cleaning slops in
a single tank, *** [decanting the water from beneath the oil,] and loading
the next cargo on top of the remaining slops. The beauty of LOT was that
it [wasted less cargo,] thereby advancing both [environmental and
economic goals.] *** The problem was that normal operation of LOT
produced discharges that exceeded the 100 ppm standard. If this criterion
had remained in effect, tankers would have had to install expensive new
equipment ***. With the support of France, the Netherlands, Norway,
and the now less-activist United Kingdom, oil and shipping companies
therefore also sought to amend the treaty. Oil companies considered LOT
so effective that they wanted diplomats to scrap the 1954/62 zonal
approach altogether. The pressures for greater environmental protection,
however, led them to support the more limited objective of redefining
the limits on discharges from the 100 ppm ‘‘content’’ criterion to one
that could be monitored using existing onboard equipment.19
In a unanimously accepted compromise in 1969, more stringent and
enforceable regulations were framed in terms that averted equipment
17
18

19

M’Gonigle and Zacher, Pollution, Politics, and International Law, p. 100.
J. H. Kirby, ‘‘The Clean Seas Code: A Practical Cure of Operation Pollution,’’ in Third
International Conference on Oil Pollution of the Sea: Report of Proceedings, Rome 7–9
October 1968 (Winchester, England: Warren and Son, 1968), pp. 201–19.
Kirby, ‘‘The Clean Seas Code,’’ p. 206.

Regime Design Matters

661

requirements. Within the fifty-mile near-shore zones, discharges could
now only involve ‘‘clean ballast’’ that left no visible trace; outside the fiftymile zones, discharges could not exceed 60 liters of oil per mile (60 l/m).
Proponents argued that the clean ballast provision would improve
enforcement by transforming any sighting of a discharge into evidence of
a violation.20 The more crucial change involved a new limit that total
discharges not exceed one fifteen-thousandth of a tanker’s capacity.21
Although compliance with this standard required a tanker to reduce its
average discharges by almost 98 percent, Shell’s J. H. Kirby claimed that
‘‘any responsibly run ship, no matter how big, could operate’’ within these
standards if it used LOT.22 The low total discharge limit also allowed port
authorities to assume that any tanker with completely clean tanks ***
had violated the agreement.23 These standards took effect in 1978 and
remain in force today through their incorporation into the 1973
MARPOL agreement.
The Equipment Subregime
By the early 1970s, public concern was pushing environmental issues
onto the international political scene with increasing frequency. The
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment and negotiation
of the London Dumping Convention in 1972 set the stage for a major
overhaul of the OILPOL agreement. IMCO hosted a major conference in
1973 to negotiate the MARPOL treaty. Its goal was the replacement of
OILPOL’s rules with rules that would cover all major types of vesselsource marine pollution.
The U.S. government had become increasingly concerned that the
ease with which tanker crews could violate discharge standards and the
massive resources and diligence needed to detect violations were preventing effective mitigation of the growing oil pollution problem.24 By 1972,
20

21

22
23

24

Assembly resolution 391, IMCO/IMO doc. resolution A.391(X), 1 December 1977,
Annex, par. 5. All document citations herein refer to IMCO/IMO documents housed
in the IMO Secretariat library. ***
1969 Amendments to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
of the Sea by Oil, 21 October 1969, reprinted in Bernd Ruster and Bruno Simma,
eds., International Protection of the Environment: Treaties and Related Documents
(Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 1975).
Kirby, ‘‘The Clean Seas Code,’’ p. 208.
See Kirby, ‘‘The Clean Seas Code,’’ pp. 200 and 209; and William T. Burke, Richard
Legatski, and William W. Woodhead, National and International Law Enforcement
in the Ocean (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1975), p. 129.
M’Gonigle and Zacher, Pollution, Politics, and International Law, p. 108.

662

International Law and International Relations

Congress had adopted legislation that threatened to require all American
tankers as well as all tankers entering U.S. ports to install expensive
pollution-reducing equipment. The legislation included a proposal to
require all large tankers to install double hulls to address accidental spills
and segregated ballast tanks (SBT) to address intentional discharges. The
SBT system involved arranging ballast tanks and associated piping such
that ballast water could not come into contact with oil being carried as
cargo. The system was expensive both in terms of capital and the reduction to cargo-carrying capacity. The United States sought international
agreement to require SBT but threatened to require it unilaterally if necessary. Discharge requirements clearly were cheaper, more economically
efficient, and ‘‘in theory . . . a good idea.’’25 However, environmental
pressures and growing evidence that LOT was neither as widespread
nor as effective as had been hoped led the United States and the United
Kingdom to support rules that offered easier and more effective
enforcement.
The largely U.S.-based oil companies initially opposed SBT requirements but eventually supported them as preferable to threatened U.S.
unilateral rules. Many shipping states also reluctantly supported SBT
requirements. They believed such requirements would avert an even
more costly double bottom requirement. It was also fiscally acceptable:
the combination of a recent building boom and the proposed language of
the requirements meant that tanker owners would only have to incur the
additional costs of SBT many years in the future and then only for large
tankers. However, governments representing shipbuilding interests
(France and Japan) and those representing independent tanker owners
(Denmark, Germany, Greece, Norway, and Sweden) opposed the requirement.26 By a vote of thirty to seven, the conference adopted a requirement
for tankers over 70,000 tons built in 1980 and later to install SBT.
By 1977, a spate of accidents in the United States and continuing
enforcement concerns led President Jimmy Carter to propose that SBT
requirements be applied to all tankers, not just large new tankers.27 Given
(1) that the United States was again explicitly threatening unilateral
action and (2) that the 1973 MARPOL agreement [had only been ratified
25

26
27

See statements submitted by the U.S. delegation to the 13th Preparatory Session for an
International Conference on Marine Pollution in 1973: IMCO/IMO doc. MP XIII/2(c)/5,
23 May 1972. ***
M’Gonigle and Zacher, Pollution, Politics, and International Law, p. 114.
Jacob W. Ulvila, ‘‘Decisions with Multiple Objectives in Integrative Bargaining,’’ Ph.D.
diss., Harvard University, 1979, appendix A1.1.

Regime Design Matters

663

by three states,] IMCO called a second major conference in 1978. State
positions reflected the fact that retrofitting existing tankers with SBT
would reduce each tanker’s (and the fleet’s) cargo capacity by some 15
percent.28 Greece, Norway, and Sweden saw this as a means to put scores
of their laid up independent tankers back to work. However, most states
saw SBT retrofitting as extremely expensive.29 Just as the 1962 amendments had prompted LOT development, the 1973 MARPOL agreement
prompted oil companies to perfect a technique known as crude oil washing (COW), which entailed spraying down cargo tanks with the cargo
itself rather than with seawater. Operating COW equipment during cargo
delivery transformed oil that otherwise would have been discharged as
slops into usable delivered cargo, simultaneously reducing oil pollution
and increasing cargo owner revenues. The industry proposal for COW as
an alternative to SBT produced a compromise in which tankers built
after 1982 had to install both SBT and COW, while existing tankers had
to be retrofitted with either SBT or COW by 1985. The 1978 Protocol
Relating to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from ships was made an integral part of the 1973 MARPOL agreement.
While MARPOL and its protocol, known collectively as MARPOL 73/78,
did not enter into force until 1983, their standards regulated all new
construction after 1979.

observed compliance levels
Available evidence demonstrates a wide divergence in levels of compliance under these two subregimes. During the same time period in which
almost every tanker owner was retrofitting existing tankers and buying
new tankers to conform with MARPOL’s requirements for SBT and
COW, large numbers of tanker operators continued to discharge oil well
in excess of legal limits. ***
Violations of the clean ballast, 60 l/m, and total discharge standards
in place since 1978 have been common. Oil company surveys from the
1970s show that neither oil company nor independent tankers reduced
average discharge levels to the one fifteen-thousandth limit in any year
between 1972 and 1977 (see Figure 25.1). Although oil company tankers
28

29

See Sonia Z. Pritchard, ‘‘Load on Top: From the Sublime to the Absurd,’’ Journal of
Maritime Law and Commerce 9 (April 1978), pp. 185–224 at p. 194.
For an excellent discussion of state positions during both the 1973 and 1978 conferences,
see M’Gonigle and Zacher, Pollution, Politics, and International Law, pp. 107–42.

International Law and International Relations

664

Fraction of cargo (fifteen-thousandths)

50
45
Independent tankers

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

Legal limit as of October 1978

Oil company tankers

0
1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

figure 25.1. Average tanker discharges, 1972–77.
Source: U.S. Congress, House Committee on Government Operations, Oil Tanker Pollution:
Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation, 18 and 19
July 1978, 95th Congress, 2d sess., p. 322.

dramatically reduced average discharges in the early 1970s, discharges
remained at three times the legal limit. The two-thirds of the fleet operated
by independent oil transporters did far worse, with discharges that were
thirty times the legal limit and that were not much below levels that
a tanker practicing no pollution control would have produced.30 The
trends in these discharges suggest that few tankers complied with the
limit after it took legal effect in 1978.31
Other evidence confirms the frequency of discharge violations. [National Academy of Sciences studies conducted in 1981 and 1989 assumed
that significant fractions (50 percent and 15–20 percent, respectively) of
the world’s tanker fleet were violating the total discharge limit.32] Representatives of independent transporters [admitted] that tankers often
30

31

32

See, for example, the estimate of 0.3 percent in James E. Moss, Character and Control of
Sea Pollution by Oil (Washington, D.C: American Petroleum Institute, 1963), p. 47, and
the estimate of 0.4 percent in IMCO/IMO doc. OP 1/21, 15 January 1965, of the Oil
Pollution subcommittee. (Using note 30 as a guide, this indicates the only document
issued relating to agenda item 21 at the 1st meeting of the subcommittee.)
Unfortunately, oil companies discontinued the surveys after 1977. Personal communication from Arthur McKenzie, Tanker Advisory Center, New York, 1992.
[IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC XVI/Inf.2, 4 November 1981. IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC 30/
Inf.13, 19 September 1990, p. 15.]

Regime Design Matters

665

violate discharge limits ***.33 Studies of detected oil slicks and dead
seabirds as well as [IMO violation reports] confirm that many tankers
continue to discharge their slops at sea.34
[By contrast there is considerable evidence] that compliance with
the equipment standards has been exceptionally high. By 1981, *** new
tankers were being built with SBT and existing tankers were being
retrofitted with SBT and/or COW.35 [National] and international studies
and industry experts [assume] that all tankers comply with the equipment
standards ***.36
Analysis of previously unavailable data on equipment installed on
large tankers supports these perceptions.37 Among large tankers in the
fleet at the end of 1991, 94 percent of tankers built in 1979 or earlier had
installed SBT or COW as required, 98 percent of those built between
1980 and 1982 had installed SBT as required, and 98 percent of those
built after 1982 had installed both SBT and COW as required. The figures
not only confirm remarkably high compliance rates but also document
that tankers of all nations, not merely those that supported the equipment requirements during negotiation, have complied.

33

34

35

36

37

For example, ‘‘IMO, Tanker Owners Urge Increase in Facilities Accepting Oily Wastes,’’
International Environment Reporter, 8 March 1989, p. 130.
See, for example, C. J. Camphuysen, Beached Bird Surveys in the Netherlands 1915–1988:
Seabird Mortality in the Southern North Sea Since the Early Days of Oil Pollution
(Amsterdam: Werkgroep Noordzee, 1989); United States Coast Guard, Polluting Incidents
In and Around U.S. Waters (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, 1973 and
1975–86); N. Smit-Kroes, Harmonisatie Noordzeebeleid: Brief van de Minister van
Verkeer en Waterstaat (Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal: 17–408) (Harmonization of
North Sea policy: Letter from the Minister of Transport and Waterways; Lower House
of Parliament) (The Hague: Government Printing Office of the Netherlands, 1988);
IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC 21 /Inf. 8, 21 March 1985; and Second International Conference
on the Protection of the North Sea, Quality Status of the North Sea: A Report by the
Scientific and Technical Working Group (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office,
1987), p. 14.
Drewry Shipping Consultants, Ltd., The Impact of New Tanker Regulations, Drewry
publication no. 94 (London: Drewry Shipping Consultants, Ltd., 1981), p. 25.
See IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC 30/Inf.l3, 19 September 1990, p. 8; Second International
Conference on the Protection of the North Sea, Quality Status of the North Sea, p. 57;
Pieter Bergmeijer, ‘‘The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from
Ships,’’ paper presented at the 17th Pacem in Maribus conference, Rotterdam, August
1990, p. 12; and personal interview with E. J. M. Ball, Oil Companies International
Marine Forum, London, 26 June 1991;
The detailed statistics in Table 1 and Figure 2 were developed from an electronic version
of Clarkson Research Studies, Ltd., The Tanker Register (London: Clarkson Research
Studies, Ltd., 1991) generously provided by Clarkson Research Studies, Ltd.

666

International Law and International Relations

[Both] international politics and private economics would lead us to
expect higher compliance with the discharge standards, not the equipment
standards. The discharge standards had been adopted unanimously.
In contrast, several powerful nations opposed the equipment standards
in both 1973 and 1978. Tankers seeking the economic benefits of conserving oil could have done so most cheaply by using the equipment-free
option of LOT, not by installing COW or the even more expensive SBT.
Indeed, in 1978, one analyst *** predicted that the enormous costs of SBT
would make compliance ‘‘negligible.’’38
In short, the empirical evidence of higher compliance levels with the
equipment subregime runs contrary to predictions based on a simple
analysis of exogenous power and interests. How do we explain what
appears to be a significant divergence between theory and observed outcomes? Was any of the observed compliance treaty-induced? If so, what
elements of the equipment standards compliance system explain its
greater success at eliciting compliance? ***

was compliance treaty-induced?
[Before explaining these differences in compliance levels, we need to
ensure they can be attributed to features of the subregimes.] *** Did
tanker owners and operators act any differently than they would have in
the absence of international regulations? The following accounting
strongly suggests (1) that increased use of LOT owes more to economics
than to international law, (2) that increased installation of COW equipment owes much to economics but also reflects the MARPOL regime’s
influences, and (3) that increased installation of SBT largely is due to
MARPOL influences.

LOT
[The] 1969 rules had little to do with the observed increase in the use of
LOT by tanker operators. A large share of tankers simply did not use
LOT or comply with the discharge standards. The continuing noncompliance with discharge standards did not result from an inability to use
38

Charles Odidi Okidi, Regional Control of Ocean Pollution: Legal and Institutional
Problems and Prospects (Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands: Sijthoff and Noordhoff,
1978), p. 34.

Regime Design Matters

667

LOT – a noncomplex procedure that required no new equipment – but
from insufficient incentives to use it.
The subregime itself produced few effective mechanisms for inducing
operators to adopt LOT. [The] discharge subregime’s compliance system
failed to induce the monitoring and enforcement necessary to deter violations. The subregime’s failure effectively to detect, identify, prosecute,
and penalize violators left tanker operators’ incentives to comply with it
largely uninfluenced. ***
Given the absence of these pathways for regime influence, it is not
surprising to find that economic influences readily explain the pattern
of LOT usage. A tanker operator’s first-order incentives to use LOT
depended on the costs of recovering waste oil, the value of that oil, and
the ownership of the oil being transported. This last factor meant that
oil companies had far greater incentives to adopt LOT than did independent transporters. The latter carry oil on charter to cargo owners
and are paid for the amount of oil initially loaded, *** not for the amount
delivered. Therefore, discharging waste oil at sea costs the independent
transporter nothing. *** In contrast, operators that own their cargoes, as
oil companies usually do[, could benefit by almost $15,000 per trip.39]
The decrease in average discharges of oil company tankers in the
1970s and the absence of a similar decrease in discharges of independent tankers correlate more with these divergent incentives and with
rising oil prices than with any treaty proscription. Oil companies’
greater incentives to conserve oil explain why their average discharges were
lower than those of independent tankers in 1972 and why they decreased
discharges more rapidly after the 1973 oil price hikes (see Figure 25.1). If
the regime *** were influencing oil company behavior, these decreases
should have occurred only after the total discharge limits took legal effect
in 1978 ***. The far smaller decrease in average discharge among independents reflects the fact that conserved oil had little value to them.
* * *
COW
The almost universal installation of COW equipment initially tempts
one to conclude that compliance was treaty-induced. The contrast in rates
39

The following discussion of the costs of LOT, COW, and SBT draws heavily on William
G. Waters, Trevor D. Heaver, and T. Verrier, Oil Pollution from Tanker Operations:
Causes, Costs, Controls (Vancouver, B.C.: Center for Transportation Studies, 1980).

668

International Law and International Relations

of use of LOT and COW suggest that differences in the designs of the
corresponding subregimes may be responsible, given that both methods
allowed a tanker operator to reduce waste oil. However, closer evaluation reveals that here, too, economic factors played an important role,
although not an exclusive one.
Like LOT, COW has economic as well as environmental benefits.
COW’s costs include those for the washing machines and the additional
time and labor needed to wash tanks in port ***. As with LOT, the
offsetting benefit of more delivered cargo accrues to the cargo owner.
However, the tanker operator also benefits: the decrease in oil left onboard
increases the tanker’s effective cargo capacity and reduces [repair and
maintenance costs. Saving about $9,000 per voyage.]
These economic incentives to adopt COW are [evident in the timing
of its adoption.] *** [Many oil companies adopted cow in the mid-1970s,
years after it became available but before the MARPOL deadline. Like
LOT, this timing corresponds with the rising oil prices of the 1970s.]
The contrast to SBT *** also confirms the role of economics. The higher
capital costs of SBT and the significant reduction to cargo-carrying
capacity that SBT involved imposed a net cost per voyage on a tanker
with SBT of $1,500 ***. A new tanker installing both COW and SBT, as
required by MARPOL, faced costs of almost $8,000 per voyage. Owners
of large tankers built before 1980, who were allowed to choose between
SBT and COW, installed COW equipment on 89 percent of their tankers and SBT on only 36 percent. Owners also installed COW equipment on 95 percent of large tankers built between 1980 and 1982, even
though MARPOL only required them to install SBT. ***
[If economics were the sole influence on behavior, however, we should
expect companies to achieve the economic goal of conserving oil by the
cheapest and most cost-effective means possible, that is, by LOT, not
COW.] We should also expect to see the same divergence between the
behavior of independent carriers and oil companies as we observed in
the LOT case. Yet the 99 percent compliance rate attests to the fact that
all tanker owners were installing COW. The adoption of COW more
frequently than SBT does not imply that the subregime was ineffective,
only that when the subregime left owners with alternatives, their choices
were driven by costs. In contrast to clear flaws in the compliance system
supporting discharge standards, *** the design of the compliance system
supporting equipment requirements provided several means of successfully reducing both the incentives and ability of tanker owners to violate
COW requirements. Thus, an interplay among economics and subregime

Regime Design Matters

669

characteristics appears to have been the source of widespread COW
adoption.
SBT
Adoption of the SBT standard provides an unambiguous example of
subregime influence on behavior. Unlike COW or LOT, tanker owners
had no economic incentives to install this technology. SBT’s additional
piping and equipment added several million dollars to the cost of a new
tanker, representing almost 5 percent of total cost.40 Installing SBT also
reduced cargo capacity ***. Yet these costs provided no offsetting
benefits ***. [Supporters of SBT admitted that SBT would increase the
cost of carrying oil by 15 percent;] some oil company estimates ran up to
50 percent.41 As late as 1991, oil and shipping interests opposed
mandatory SBT retrofitting as too expensive.42
[Observed SBT installations reflect effective treaty rules rather than
economics.] [More] than 98 percent of those required to install SBT did so
despite the significant costs involved. *** [The timing of the increase in the
number of tankers installing SBT seen in Figure 25.2 reinforces the conclusion that owners installed SBT only under the regulatory threat posed
by the subregime’s compliance system.] In short, [‘‘If there were not a
regulatory requirement, there would not be SBT.’’43] Within several years,
the subregime had caused a radical change in tanker owner behavior.
One alternative explanation of SBTadoption deserves special attention.
At least one analyst has claimed that hegemonic pressures exerted by the
United States explain the success of MARPOL.44 [Certainly SBT requirements were adopted because of explicit threats of unilateral U.S.
regulation. Yet, this does not imply that subsequent behaviors results
40

41

42

43

44

See Philip A. Cummins, Dennis E. Logue, Robert D. Tollison, and Thomas D. Willett,
‘‘Oil Tanker Pollution Control: Design Criteria Versus Effective Liability Assessment,’’
Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 7 (October 1975), pp. 181–82; and Charles S.
Pearson, International Marine Environmental Policy: The Economic Dimension
(Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975), p. 98.
See IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC V/Inf. 4, 8 March 1976, p. A18; and M’Gonigle and Zacher,
Pollution, Politics, and International Law, p. 134.
See IMCO/IMO doc. MEPC 31/8/5, 4 April 1991; and Osborne and Ferguson,
‘‘Technology, MARPOL, and Tankers,’’ p. 6–2.
Personal interview with Sean Connaughton, marine transportation analyst, American
Petroleum Institute Washington, D.C., 8 April 1992.
Jesper Grolin, ‘‘Environmental Hegemony, Maritime Community, and the Problem of Oil
Tanker Pollution in Michael A. Morris, ed., North–South Perspectives on Marine Policy
(Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1988).

670

International Law and International Relations

100

Percentage of tankers

80

60

40

20

0
Pre-1970 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991
SBT tankers
COW tankers

figure 25.2. Percentage of tankers with segregated ballast tanks (SBT) and/or
crude oil washing equipment (COW) onboard in 1991, by year of tanker
construction.
Source: Electronic version of Clarkson Research Studies, Ltd., The Tanker Register (London:
Clarkson Research Studies, Ltd., 1991), provided to the author.

from that same pressure.] The relevant question is, ‘‘Could the United
States, through unilateral measures, have induced so many tanker owners
to install SBT?’’ Available evidence suggests not.
While the United States wields tremendous diplomatic leverage, it
wields nothing near hegemonic power in oil transportation markets.
Since the United States became concerned about oil pollution in the late
1960s, it has been responsible for less than 5 percent of new tankers
built, less than 7 percent of tanker registrations, and less than 20 percent
of world oil imports.45 Given SBT’s high costs, oil transportation companies would have been more likely to respond to unilateral U.S. equipment requirements by installing SBT on a sufficient number of tankers to
service the U.S. market than by installing it on all tankers. *** Indeed, in
terms of power to control oil tankers, Japan – which opposed SBT
45

See Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, Annual Summary of Merchant Ships Completed
(London: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, various years); Lloyd’s Register of Shipping,
Statistical Tables (London: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, various years); and United
Nations, Statistical Yearbook (New York: United Nations, various years).

Regime Design Matters

671

requirements in both 1973 and 1978 – consistently has controlled larger
shares of tanker construction, tanker registration, and oil imports than
the United States. ***

mechanisms of influence
Compliance with discharge standards via the use of LOT was largely an
artifact of economic factors. Compliance with requirements for SBT and
COW has been both higher and more clearly the result of the treaty. Rival
explanations of economic influences and international political hegemony prove incapable of adequately explaining the observed outcomes.
The equipment subregime succeeded at inducing reluctant tanker owners
to spend considerable money on additional equipment that provided no
economic benefit. ***
Which of the many differences between the two subregimes best
explain the different levels of observed compliance? [The design of the
equipment regime induced compliance by (1) eliciting monitoring and
enforcement and (2) reducing opportunities for violation.]

Enhancing Transparency
The equipment subregime had one major advantage over the discharge
subregime in its significantly higher transparency level. Violations of the
SBT and COW requirements simply [were easier to observe.]
Consider the two compliance information systems. Both OILPOL
and MARPOL required tanker captains to note discharges in record
books and to make those books available to port authorities for inspection. This obvious reliance on self-incrimination made naval and aerial
surveillance programs the more common means of detecting illegal discharges. The total discharge standard of one fifteen-thousandth of cargo
capacity improved on this system by providing a criterion that could
be monitored by tank inspections in port without relying on information supplied by the tanker captain. Practically speaking, these inspections were restricted to ports in oil-exporting states, since discharges
occurred after delivery, on a tanker’s return to port to load more cargo.
In contrast, the compliance information system for equipment standards relied on the fact that buying or retrofitting a tanker requires the
knowledge and consent of at least three other actors: a builder, a
classification society, and an insurance company. Agents in each of

672

International Law and International Relations

these industries would know of a violation even before it was committed. MARPOL also required flag state governments, or classification societies nominated by them, to survey all tankers to ensure
compliance before issuing the required International Oil Pollution
Prevention (IOPP) certificate and to conduct periodic inspections
thereafter.46 As part of the process of evaluating tankers to provide
insurers with the information needed to set rates, classification societies
regularly monitor compliance with international construction requirements ***.47 Finally, MARPOL gave all port states the legal authority to
inspect a tanker’s IOPP certificate and its equipment ***.
The equipment standards subregime made violations more transparent than violations in the discharge standards subregime in several ways.
To begin with, regulating the tanker builder–tanker buyer transaction
yielded a drastically reduced number of events to be monitored. While
several thousand tankers ply the world’s oceans, they are owned, built, and
classified by only a few owners, shipyards, and classification societies. A
tanker making ten trips per year could violate the total discharge standard
three hundred times in its thirty-year life but could only violate the
equipment requirements once.
Equipment standards also required authorities to monitor fewer
locations ***. The discharge process standards – 100 ppm, clean ballast,
and 60 l/m – required patrols of wide areas of ocean to detect slicks that
often could not be linked with the responsible tanker. *** The addition of
total discharge limits allowed detection of violations while a tanker was
in an oil port, a procedure involving far fewer resources. Unfortunately,
most oil-exporting states exhibited little interest in preventing marine
pollution ***. Inspections to verify compliance with equipment standards
could occur in developed oil-importing states, which had shown far more
interest in enforcement. The shift from the 100 ppm and 60 l/m limits
to total discharge limits improved dramatically the practical ability to
detect violations. The shift from total discharge limits to equipment
standards improved the regime further by increasing incentives for
monitoring among those who already had the practical ability to monitor.
Equipment standards dramatically eased the problem of obtaining
evidence needed to sanction a violator. The standards eliminated any
reliance on self-incrimination by the perpetrator of a violation. Detecting
46
47

MARPOL 73/78, Annex I, Regulations 4 and 5.
Personal interview with John Foxwell, Shell International Marine, London, 27 June
1991.

Regime Design Matters

673

an equipment violation and identifying its perpetrator also were not timesensitive. *** Authorities also faced several difficulties in transforming
detection of a discharge at sea into a case worthy of prosecution. In what
can be called ‘‘passive voice’’ violations, often a tanker could not be
identified as responsible for a detected slick: authorities could only say
a violation ‘‘had been committed.’’ Even if a responsible tanker could be
identified, determining whether the 100 ppm or 60 l/m criterion had been
exceeded generally was difficult. The total discharge standard could have
eliminated this problem, but oil-exporting states never established inspection programs. These flaws in the design of the discharge standards
compliance system were not necessarily inherent or insurmountable. For
example, some analysts proposed placing observers on all tankers to verify
compliance with discharge standards.48 *** However, such programs
would have involved huge expenditures of resources to produce only
a low probability of successful deterrence.
* * *
The entry into force of total discharge standards in 1978 allowed
inspectors in oil-loading ports to assume that any incoming tanker with
all tanks free of slops had violated the very low limit placed on total
discharges. However, even those oil-exporting states that were party to
MARPOL had strong disincentives to inspect ships in their ports: ports
that were conducting inspections were less attractive loading sites than
neighboring ports that were not conducting inspections. Not surprisingly,
most governments did not alter their enforcement strategies in response
to the greater potential for enforcement provided by the promulgation
of total discharge standards. In contrast, considerable evidence confirms
that the equipment regime significantly changed the ways in which nations
and classification societies conducted tanker inspections. Many of the
states that originally had opposed the 1973 and 1978 U.S. proposals for
equipment regulations subsequently conducted the in-port inspections
needed to detect violations. In 1982, the maritime authorities of fourteen European states signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Port
State Control, committing themselves annually to inspect 25 percent of
ships entering their ports for violations of maritime treaties, including
MARPOL.49 *** Even though several member states had voted against
48
49

Cummins et al, ‘‘Oil Tanker Pollution Control,’’ p. 171.
‘‘Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control,’’ reprinted in ILM, vol. 21,
1982, p. 1.

674

International Law and International Relations

SBT, all fourteen have included checks of IOPP certificates in the
thousands of inspections they conduct each year. *** While *** countries
undoubtedly vary widely in how frequently and carefully they conduct
inspections, all have made inspections for MARPOL-required equipment
a standard element of their inspection programs.
The effectiveness of these governmental inspections depends at least in
part on the initial issue of accurate IOPP certificates by flag states or
classification societies designated by them. Reports to IMO for 1984 to
1990 show that missing and inaccurate pollution certificates declined
steadily from 9 percent to 1 percent; the memorandum of understanding
secretariat reports similar declines – from 11 percent to 3 percent.50 These
trends suggest that after an initial period of learning how to issue and
inspect certificates, classification societies and governments both now
issue thorough and accurate certifications. Like port state governments, flag states and classification societies appear to have altered their
behavior to become active participants in the equipment subregime’s
compliance information system. ***
The greater transparency of violations of equipment requirements
served perhaps most importantly to reassure other tanker owners that
their own compliance would not place them at a competitive disadvantage in the marketplace. An environmentally concerned tanker operator
inclined to comply with the discharge standards could not escape the
knowledge that others probably would not comply. The economic
incentives to discharge oil at sea, the absence of transparency about
who was and who was not complying, and the attendant inability of enforcement efforts to effectively deter discharges precluded any assumption other than that many competitors would violate the discharge
standards to reduce their costs. The greater transparency of equipment
requirements assured a tanker owner installing SBT and COW that all
other owners also were doing so. ***
The equipment standards provided the foundation for a compliance
information system far more transparent than was possible under the
discharge subregime. In response, even governments that had opposed the
adoption of the requirements conducted inspections for compliance.
The subregime’s compliance information system channeled the behavior
of both governments and classification societies into monitoring activities that supported the regime. It did so by ensuring that those actors
50

Secretariat of the Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control, Annual Report
(The Hague: The Netherlands Government Printing Office, various years).

Regime Design Matters

675

with incentives to monitor compliance also had the practical ability and
legal authority to do so. ***
Facilitating Potent but Low-Cost Sanctions
Greater transparency translated into higher levels of compliance with
equipment standards only because the compliance system also induced
likely and potent sanctions. The noncompliance response system of the
discharge subregime failed to do the same. ***
Detected discharge violations frequently remained unprosecuted because
the subregime relied on customary international law with its deference to
enforcement by flag states. Both OILPOL and MARPOL required a government that detected a discharge violation at sea to forward all evidence to
the flag state for prosecution. *** Flag states often lack the ability to
prosecute, since tankers flying their flag may rarely enter their ports. They
also have few incentives to prosecute because vigorous enforcement on their
part would induce owners to take their registrations, and the large
associated fees, to a less scrupulous state.51 *** In short, the flag states
with the authority to prosecute lacked incentives to do so, and the coastal
states with the incentives to prosecute lacked the authority to do so.
Under the discharge standards, even states sincerely seeking to prosecute and convict a violator faced major obstacles to success. As already
noted, evidence of a violation often failed to produce a violator, and
otherwise convincing evidence often failed to meet the legal standards of
proof needed for conviction. Evidentiary hurdles should have decreased
with the prohibition of discharges that produced visible traces. However,
even with aerial photographs of discharges, tankers frequently avoid conviction.52 Between 1983 and 1990, port and coastal states discarded for
lack of evidence an average of 36 percent of cases occurring in territorial
seas and successfully convicted and fined less than 33 percent of all
detected violators.53 An additional 20 percent of high-seas cases referred

51

52

53

Paul Stephen Dempsey, ‘‘Compliance and Enforcement in International Law – Oil
Pollution of the Marine Environment by Ocean Vessels,’’ Northwestern Journal of
International Law and Business 6 (Summer 1984), pp. 459–561 and p. 576 in particular.
See ibid., p. 526; and personal interview with Ronald Carly, Ministry of Transportation,
Brussels, 10 June 1991.
Peet, Operational Discharges from Ships, pp. 17–18, Tables 11 and 12; and Marie-Jose
Stoop, Olieverontreiniging door schepen op de noordzee over de periode 1982–1987:
opsporing en vervolging (Oil pollution by ships on the North Sea 1982–1987:
Investigations and prosecution) (Amsterdam: Werkgroep Noordzee, July 1989).

676

International Law and International Relations

to flag states were not prosecuted for the same reason, and less than 15
percent of all referrals resulted in fines being imposed.54 *** Many
experts had hoped that the clearer evidence from inspections for total
discharge violations would overcome these problems, but *** there is no
record ‘‘of a single case where the one fifteen-thousandth rule was used
for prosecution.’’55
When conviction was successful, governments rarely imposed penalties adequate to deter future discharge violations ***.56 Most states’
courts are reluctant to impose fines disproportionate to the offense to
compensate for low detection and conviction rates. The principle that
‘‘the punishment should fit the crime’’ places an upper bound on fines that
may be too low to successfully deter violation, if detection and prosecution is difficult. Since 1975, the average fine imposed by states never has
exceeded $7,000 and *** has decreased over time.57 Even when a large
penalty is assessed, the delays between initial violation and final
sentencing and the reluctance of most states to detain tankers for minor
discharge violations often mean that the responsible tanker and crew have
long since left the state’s jurisdiction, making fine collection difficult. ***
In place of the discharge subregime’s legal system of prosecution,
conviction, and fines, the equipment subregime relied on quite different responses to noncompliance. The most immediate sanctions involved
the ability of classification societies, insurers, and flag state governments
to withhold the classification, insurance, and pollution prevention certificates that a tanker needed to conduct international trade. As John Foxwell
put it, tankers ‘‘cannot get insurance without certification, and can’t get
certification without compliance.’’58 These sanctions amounted to preventing any illegally equipped tanker from doing business. ***
Besides these market-based sanctions, the equipment subregime obligated port states either to detain tankers with false pollution prevention
certificates or inadequate equipment or to bar them from port.59 As
administrative sanctions, these responses skirted both flag state and port
state legal systems – and the associated sensitivities regarding legal
54

55
56
57
58

59

Ronald Bruce Mitchell, ‘‘From Paper to Practice: Improving Environmental Treaty
Compliance,’’ Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., 1992, Table 5–1.
Personal interview with E. J. M. Ball.
MARPOL 73/78, Article 4(4).
Mitchell, ‘‘From Paper to Practice,’’ Table 4–5.
Personal interview with John Foxwell, Shell International Marine, London, 27 June
1991.
MARPOL 73/78, Articles 5(2) and 5(3).

Regime Design Matters

677

sovereignty. Paradoxically, this strategy made port states more likely to
use detention and flag states more willing to accept it. Detention also
had the virtue that even low usage by a few major oil-importing states
forced tanker owners to choose between risking detention and the more
costly option of not trading to those lucrative markets. Authorizing
developed states to detain violating tankers effectively moved the right
to sanction to countries that had far greater domestic political pressures
to use it.
Coupling the equipment requirements themselves with these administrative sanctions completely eliminated the legal and evidentiary problems that make even clear violations of discharge standards difficult to
prosecute successfully. Detention imposed opportunity costs on a tanker
operator of several thousand dollars per day, and forced retrofitting
could cost millions of dollars – far exceeding the fines for discharge
violations.60 Detention had the positive quality that it was not so costly as
to be considered a disproportionate response to the crime but was costly
enough to deter other violations. In short, detention was simultaneously
more likely and more costly.
* * *
Although few states detained ships, available evidence supports the
conclusion that the subregime altered enforcement behavior. Not one of
the states that detained ships began to do so until after MARPOL took
effect in 1983.61 Even the United States waited until that year – ten years
after the detention provision had been accepted. Consider the counterfactual: it is unlikely that the United States would have detained tankers
for breaching U.S.-only requirements for SBT, even though it had the
practical ability to do so. Without MARPOL, such detentions would
have constituted a major infringement of flag state sovereignty. If the
use of the more costly detention sanction had reflected an exogenous
increase in the interests of states in environmental enforcement, fines for
discharge violations should have increased at the same time. Yet, as states
began to use detention, fines did not increase dramatically.62 ***
The equipment subregime operated not by convincing reluctant actors
to enforce rules with which they disagreed but by removing the legal
60

61
62

Personal interviews with John Foxwell; and with Richard Schiferli, Memorandum of
Understanding Secretariat, Rijswijk, The Netherlands, 17 July 1991.
Personal interview with Daniel Sheehan.
See Peet, Operational Discharges from Ships, annex 15; and Dempsey, ‘‘Compliance and
Enforcement in International Law.’’

678

International Law and International Relations

barriers that inhibited effective enforcement by those states and nonstate
actors willing to enforce them. Classification societies had interests in
ensuring that the tankers they classified were able to trade without
fear of detention. The incorporation of equipment requirements into
their classification criteria provided the foundation for insurers to penalize noncompliant tankers. The willingness of a few environmentally
concerned oil-importing states to inhibit tankers that lacked the required
equipment from trading freely posed an extremely potent threat to
a tanker owner. However, the ability and willingness of these states to
threaten this sanction depended on removing international legal barriers
to its use. Once these barriers were removed, imposing sanctions involved
few costs to those imposing them, whether classification societies, insurers, or port state authorities. It thereby made detention more likely,
even though it created no new incentives for states to impose sanctions.
In a case of ‘‘nothing succeeds like success,’’ the various threats of the
equipment subregime’s noncompliance system led to initial compliance
by almost all tankers, making it rare that sanctions ever needed to be
imposed.

Building on Existing Institutions
The oil pollution control regime induced implementation of those provisions that involved few direct costs to governments. Monitoring and
enforcement proved especially likely when their costs were pushed ‘‘offbudget’’ by deputizing private, nonstate actors to issue certificates and
conduct inspections. ***
MARPOL’s equipment subregime fostered monitoring by allowing
governments to delegate responsibility for surveys to classification societies. *** MARPOL allowed [developing] states to fulfill their treaty
commitments by assigning classification and inspection responsibilities
to actors who often had greater access to and more resources with which to
conduct such inspections. Classification societies also had strong incentives to conduct accurate surveys as a means of protecting their business
reputations and avoiding problems with insurance companies. The
strategy thus simultaneously removed these tasks and the resources they
required from the hands of governments and placed them in the hands of
actors who could more easily accomplish them. *** Adding pollution
control to classification societies’ long inspection checklists required only
marginal changes to existing procedures.

Regime Design Matters

679

The many inspection programs operated by developed port states
parallel this pattern. [The] maritime authorities of the European memorandum of understanding states, the United States, and other states
interested in enforcing the equipment requirements could make simple,
low-cost alterations to port state inspections already being conducted for
safety, customs, and other purposes. *** In contrast, where states have had
to incur significant new costs to implement treaty provisions, they have
proved unlikely to do so. *** Most developed states have not established
large, ongoing surveillance programs. ***
* * *

Coercing Compliance Rather than Deterring Violation
The compliance systems of the two subregimes differ most strikingly in
the fundamental model underlying their regulatory strategies. The equipment standards subregime relied on a ‘‘coerced compliance’’strategy, which
sought to monitor behavior to prevent violations from occurring in the first
place. The discharge standards subregime was deterrence-oriented, attempting to detect, prosecute, and sanction violations after they occurred to
deter future violations.63 This basic difference in orientation made the
compliance task facing the equipment standards subregime more manageable than that facing the discharge standards subregime. The underlying
strategy choice had important consequences for the level of compliance
achieved: inhibiting the ability to violate treaty provisions proved far more
effective than increasing the disincentives for violating them.
MARPOL’s equipment standards created a remarkably effective system for detecting and sanctioning violations. *** However, the equipment
subregime’s strength really came from the fact that it rarely had to use the
more potent sanctions it made possible. *** The subregime relied on surveying behavior and preventing violations rather than detecting and investigating them afterwards.64 [The] equipment rules allowed identification
63

64

Neither strategy was incentive-based, as was the funding of compliance under the
Montreal Protocol and Framework Convention on Climate Change. For development of
the distinction between these three strategies, see Albert J. Reiss, Jr., ‘‘Consequences of
Compliance and Deterrence Models of Law Enforcement for the Exercise of Police
Discretion,’’ Law and Contemporary Problems 47 (Fall 1984), pp. 83–122; and Keith
Hawkins, Environment and Enforcement: Regulation and the Social Definition of
Pollution (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Reiss, ‘‘Consequences of Compliance and Deterrence Models of Law Enforcement for
the Exercise of Police Discretion.’’

680

International Law and International Relations

of potential violators and made it harder to actually commit a violation.
Tanker captains faced many regular autonomous decisions about whether
to violate discharge standards. In contrast, tanker owners only had to
decide once between violating or complying with equipment standards,
and their decision required cooperation from other actors and involved
major economic consequences. *** Classification societies, insurance
companies, and flag state inspectors could withhold the papers necessary
to conduct business in international oil markets, thereby frustrating any
tanker owner’s attempt to reap the benefits of sidestepping these standards.
Experience with the discharge standards had shown that many states
would not enforce pollution standards ***. Given the costs of SBT, if
deterrence had been the major source of compliance, one would expect
some tankers initially to have violated the equipment standards in an
attempt to identify which and how many states actually would enforce
the rules. Yet, compliance levels did not follow a pattern of initial
noncompliance followed by stiff sanctions and subsequent compliance.
The compliance system of the equipment subregime succeeded by effectively restricting the opportunities to violate it rather than making the
choice of violation less attractive. The very low noncompliance levels
suggest that in most cases an owner simply decided it would be impossible to convince a tanker builder, a classification society, and an insurer to
allow the purchase of a tanker without COW and SBT. *** [Obstacles] to
committing a violation played a major role in preventing such violations.
New tankers have been built initially to MARPOL standards, not retrofitted later in response to deterrence threats. ***
The equipment subregime may have been as successful as it was
precisely because it produced a redundant regulatory system. It established
compliance information and noncompliance response systems that prevented most violations but could successfully deter any actors who might
otherwise have considered violating it. *** The initial discharge standards
subregime faced problems at almost every step of the process: detecting
violations, identifying violators, prosecuting violators, and imposing
potent sanctions. The shift to total discharge standards eliminated or
mitigated some of these problems, but the problems remaining left
overall deterrent levels essentially unchanged. A tanker captain evaluating the expected costs of violating OILPOL’s or MARPOL’s discharge
standards could only conclude that the magnitude and likelihood of a
penalty were quite small. Successful deterrence strategies must ensure
that the whole legal chain operates smoothly, since the breakdown of any
link can significantly impair its effectiveness.

Regime Design Matters

681

conclusions
Nations can design regime rules to improve compliance. This article has
demonstrated that, even within a single issue-area, reference to design
features of compliance systems surrounding particular provisions is
necessary to explain observed variance in compliance. In the regime
regulating intentional oil pollution, the same governments and corporations with the same interests during the same time period complied far
more frequently with rules requiring installation of expensive equipment than they did with rules limiting total discharges of oil. Where
theories of hegemonic power and economic interests fail to explain this
variance, differences in the subregime’s compliance systems readily
explain why the former subregime led powerful actors to comply with it
while the latter did not.
The equipment standards elicited significantly higher compliance
because they selected a point for regulatory intervention that allowed for
greater transparency, increased the likelihood of forceful responses to
detected violations, built on existing institutions, and coerced compliance
by preventing actors from violating them rather than merely deterring
actors from doing so. *** [Policymakers] can improve compliance by
regulating those sectors more vulnerable to pressures for compliance and
by facilitating the efforts of those governments and nonstate actors more
likely to implement and enforce such regulations. This matching of
regulatory burdens to expected behavior places the careful choice of the
regime’s primary rules at the center of any effective compliance system.
Once such primary rules have been established, careful crafting of
the compliance information system and the noncompliance response
system can further increase the likelihood of compliance. Oil pollution
regulations succeeded by facilitating the goals of, placing responsibilities
on, and removing the legal and practical barriers limiting those governments and private actors predisposed to monitor and enforce agreements,
not by imposing obligations on recalcitrant actors. Inducing compliance
required an integrated system of rules and processes that placed actors
within a strategic triangle of compliance so that they had the political and
economic incentives, practical ability, and legal authority to perform the
tasks necessary to implement the treaty.65 When such efforts succeeded,
governments and private actors acted differently than they would have
in the absence of the regime. *** [Negotiators] can and should design and
65

I am indebted to Robert O. Keohane for the notion of a strategic triangle of compliance.

682

International Law and International Relations

redesign treaties to maximize compliance within the constraints that
power and interests impose.
Eliciting compliance is only one of the criteria on which we would
want to judge a regime’s rules. Indeed, the value of compliance itself rests
on the assumption that more compliance makes the treaty itself more
effective. In the oil pollution case, compliance with the equipment rules
involved at least as great a reduction in intentional discharges as did
compliance with the discharge standards. Thus, we can safely infer that
the higher compliance levels under the former rules also led to increased
treaty effectiveness, a fact confirmed by a consensus among most experts
that intentional oil discharges have declined since MARPOL took
effect.66 [Compliance levels are an important evaluative criteria in regime
design.] The cheaper, more flexible, and more efficient discharge standards simply failed to induce the level of compliance needed to achieve
a socially desired outcome; yet the costs of the equipment standards may
have exceeded the benefits of that outcome. In cases in which more
efficient solutions elicit compliance sufficient to achieve a policy goal,
they are clearly preferable. If expected compliance with such solutions
appears low, effective regime design requires evaluating whether the
benefits of higher compliance outweigh the expense and inefficiency of
alternative solutions.
Can we apply the findings developed from studying these two oil
pollution cases to other issue-areas? Initial selection of a difficult collaborative problem with characteristics common to many international
collaboration problems provides some confidence that we can do so.
Other treaties provide anecdotal support for some of the findings reported
herein. *** [Confirming the conclusions arrived at here requires considerably more research.] The solutions adopted in the oil pollution regime also
undoubtedly cannot be applied to all regimes or even to all environmental
regimes. Wildlife and habitat protection, for example, can rarely be
achieved through technological solutions or quantitative requirements
that can be easily monitored. *** The strategies available to international
regulators will depend at least in part on features unique to the problem
being addressed. Analysts have already shown how regimes influence
behavior in realms involving security.67 How the impacts of similar

66

67

See Ronald B. Mitchell, ‘‘Intentional Oil Pollution of the Oceans,’’ in Haas, Keohane, and
Levy, Institutions for the Earth, pp. 183–248.
See Robert Jervis, ‘‘Security Regimes,’’ in Krasner, International Regimes, pp. 173–94;
and Duffield, ‘‘International Regimes and Alliance Behavior.’’

Regime Design Matters

683

compliance systems vary across security, economic, human rights, or
environmental regimes remains one of many important future questions.
Whether the nations of the world can collaborate to resolve the many
international problems, both environmental and otherwise, that face them
will depend not on merely negotiating agreements requiring new behaviors but on ensuring that those agreements succeed in inducing governments, industry, and individuals to adopt those new behaviors. ***
[Careful] crafting and recrafting of international treaties provides one
valuable means of managing the various problems facing the nations of the
world.

26
The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources
Kal Raustiala and David G. Victor

International institutions have proliferated rapidly in the postwar period.
As new problems have risen on the international agenda, the demand for
international regimes has followed.1 At the same time, international
norms have become more demanding and intrusive.2 *** Governance
systems dominated by elites have given way to more participatory modes;
the policy process has become more complex as a growing array of
[actors] *** become engaged in decision making.3 ***
These trends – in particular the rising density of international
institutions – make it increasingly difficult to isolate and ‘‘decompose’’
individual international institutions for study.4 Yet efforts to build and
test theories about the origins, operation, and influence of international
regimes have typically been conducted as though such decomposition
was feasible. Most empirical studies focus on the development of a single regime, usually centered on a core international agreement and
1
2
3

4

See Keohane 1983; Krasner 1983; and Hasenclever et al. 1997.
Lawrence et al. 1996.
See Howse 2002; Slaughter 1997; Skolnikoff 1993; Keck and Sikkink 1998; and Haas
1992.
Keohane and Nye 2001.

We are grateful for comments on early drafts presented at Stanford Law School, New York
University Law School, Duke Law School, Harvard Law School, and the American Society
for International Law. Thanks especially to Larry Helfer, Tom Heller, Robert Keohane,
Benedict Kingsbury, Peter Lallas, Lisa Martin, Ron Mitchell, Sabrina Safrin, Gene
Skolnikoff, Richard Stewart, Chris Stone, Buzz Thompson, Jonathan Wiener, Katrina
Wyman, Oran Young, and two anonymous reviewers for their feedback. Kal Raustiala
thanks the Program on Law and Public Affairs at Princeton for support. We also thank
our research assistants, Lindsay Carlson, Lesley Coben and Joshua House.

684

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

685

administered by a discrete organization. * Such studies occasionally note
the complicated links among international institutions, but [do not focus]
systematically on explaining institutional ‘‘interplay.’’5 A few studies
have explored institutional interactions in hierarchical or nested regimes
in which certain rules have explicit precedence over others, but the theoretical implications are limited because international agreements are
rarely hierarchical.6 The prevailing scholarship on regimes has also taken
a functional approach to analyzing cooperation and has not given close
attention to how the legal and intellectual framing of issues affects the
boundaries of regimes.7 Lack of systematic attention to boundaries and
to the interactions among institutions leaves a large hole in the existing
body of theory. Yet the rising density of the international system makes it
likely that interactions among regimes will be increasingly common.
In this article we address this gap in theory by advancing several arguments about regime interactions under conditions of rising institutional
density. We develop and explore these arguments through the lens of an
understudied issue in international relations: the control of plant genetic
resources (PGR). The PGR case is important because it lies at the nexus
of critical areas of world politics – intellectual property (IP), environmental protection, agriculture, and trade.
For most of history, PGR – such as genetic codes, seed varieties, and
plant extracts – were treated as the ‘‘common heritage of all mankind.’’
They were understood to be freely available to all and owned by none.8
During the twentieth century, those rules changed radically; today, international and domestic rules declare PGR to be sovereign property and
subject to private ownership through IP rights such as patents. We explain that transformation by examining the rules that govern PGR in
their natural state – ‘‘raw’’ genetic resources – as well as the ‘‘worked’’ resources that humans improve through breeding and other [techniques.]
Raw PGR are those found in the wild, such as a flower in the rain forest
that contains a yet-undiscovered gene that could cure cancer. Worked
genetic resources, by contrast, are the products derived from that
flower – such as the marketed cancer-fighting drug. * Drawing on the
work of Harold Demsetz, we show how new technologies allowed firms
5

6
7
8

The few exceptions, using the term ‘‘interplay,’’ include Young 2002; and Stokke 2001.
See also Leebron 2002 for discussion of ‘‘conglomerate’’ regimes; and Weiss 1993 for
a warning about ‘‘treaty congestion.’’
Aggarwal 1985. ***
Exceptions include Young 2002; Wendt 1999; and Sebenius 1983.
Kloppenburg 1988.

686

International Law and International Relations

to create greater value in novel worked products, which in turn spurred
them to demand special new forms of IP for worked PGR.9 Raw PGR
also rose in perceived value – both as inputs to the innovation of new
worked products and as valuable environmental goods in their own right.
While new technologies and ideas created pressures for enclosure, the
composition and configuration of international institutions created a
highly uneven process of change. Rather than a single, discrete regime
governing PGR, the relevant rules are found in at least five clusters of
international legal agreements – what we call elemental regimes – as well
as in national rules within key states, especially the United States and the
European Union (EU). These elemental regimes overlap in scope, subject,
and time; events in one affect those in others. We term the collective of
these elements a regime complex: an array of partially overlapping and
nonhierarchical institutions governing a particular issue-area. Regime
complexes are marked by the existence of several legal agreements that
are created and maintained in distinct fora with participation of different sets of actors. The rules in these elemental regimes functionally overlap, yet there is no agreed upon hierarchy for resolving conflicts between
rules. Disaggregated decision making in the international legal system
means that agreements reached in one forum do not automatically extend
to, or clearly trump, agreements developed in other forums. We contend that regime complexes evolve in ways that are distinct from decomposable single regimes.
In this article we do not attempt a full derivation of a theory of regime
complexes. Rather, our aim is to demonstrate, through our discussion of
the PGR case, that there is utility in analyzing regime interactions systematically and guided by the concept of regime complexes. We explore
four conjectures.
First, we expect that regime complexes will demonstrate path dependence: extant arrangements in the various elemental regimes will
constrain and channel the process of creating new rules. The existing
literature on regimes implicitly presumes that regimes are negotiated on
a largely clean institutional slate. *** In regime complexes, by contrast, the
array of rules already in force channel and constrain the content of new
elemental regimes.
Second, we expect that the existence of distinct negotiating fora will
spur [forum shopping.] We explore not only the factors that we expect
will affect the degree of forum shopping – such as barriers to entry,
9

See Demsetz 1967; Libecap 1989 and 2003; and Merrill 2002.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

687

membership, and linkages among issues – but also the practical impact that
forum shopping has on the evolution of regime complexes.
Third, we expect that a dense array of international institutions will lead
to legal inconsistencies. Scholars have noted the move to law in world
politics.10 One implication is that much diplomatic effort will be focused
on [assuring] consistency – treating like situations alike – because consistency is a core element of the legal paradigm. In standard theories of
regimes, regime development is driven by political contestation over core
rules. In regime complexes, we argue, that evolution is mediated by a process focused on inconsistencies at the ‘‘joints’’ between elemental regimes.
*** There is no single, omnibus negotiation – rather, there are multiple
negotiations on different timetables and dominated by different actors.
The move to cooperation on issues that were previously the sole domain
of domestic policy only exacerbates this harmonization problem, because
it is no longer foreign ministries that dominate international diplomacy:
instead, a raft of domestic agencies, often with distinct agendas, increasingly play active roles.11
Fourth, we explore how states contend with inconsistencies through
the process of implementation and interpretation. The literature on domestic policy implementation has demonstrated that when the legislative
agenda is complex and contested, lawmakers often adopt broad, aspirational rules.12 *** Earlier studies of treaty implementation echo these
findings, showing that diplomats often negotiate broad ex ante rules and
then defer the task of working out detailed implications to the process
of implementation.13 We expect regime complexes to be particularly prone
to such behavior. Where interests are varied and complex it is difficult to
specify precise rules ex ante, and the transaction costs for making formal
changes to rules that span multiple regimes is high. *** Consequently,
states often work out solutions ‘‘on the ground’’ and, in turn, align formal
changes in the rules with the most successful implemented remedies.
We begin by summarizing the PGR case and theorizing about the
dramatic change in property right norms during the past century. We
introduce each element of the regime complex and show how the interactions between elemental regimes have become more numerous as the international rules have become more expansive, intrusive, and demanding.
10
11
12
13

Goldstein et al. 2001.
Slaughter 1997.
See Ingram 1977; Bardach and Kagan 1982; and Stewart 1975.
See Victor, Raustiala, and Skolnikoff 1998; Weiss and Jacobson 1998; and Chayes and
Chayes 1995.

688

International Law and International Relations

We then explore the significance of the concept of a regime complex for
the theories of international institutions ***.

explaining norm change: the rise of property rights
in plant genetic resources
PGR have been a central part of human civilization since its inception,
though genes were not well understood until recently. *** Whether in the
wild or in seed banks, for centuries PGR were viewed as a resource that
was shared in common and accessible to all – a system that did not assign
private ownership of these resources and later became labeled the ‘‘common heritage of mankind.’’ * We call this basic structure of property rights
the ‘‘common heritage’’ system. While a particular specimen of a plant
could be owned, genetic resources per se were not owned by individuals
or states. Common heritage was coupled to open access, which meant that
states did not generally restrict others from obtaining small samples of
PGR, such as seeds ***.
In the twentieth century, this structure of property rights changed
markedly. By the 1990s, governments viewed raw PGR as a sovereign
resource rather than as common heritage; increasingly governments also
afforded individuals a wider range of varied IP rights for worked PGR ***.
[Not] all international agreements embraced this approach, and for some
time there was considerable conflict among the various regime rules. (In
some areas, the conflicts persist.) Ultimately, however, a broad consensus
emerged ***. We call this new system the ‘‘property rights’’ approach.
Some states kept those property rights for the state itself, often with the
state asserting not just control over these rights but direct ownership.
Many other states, however, permitted the creation of individual property
rights and increasingly this is the norm.
To describe and explain this fundamental normative shift toward enclosure we look to the theory of property rights famously developed by
Demsetz and elaborated by Libecap and others.14 Demsetz suggested that
the development of property rights is primarily a function of changes in
value: ‘‘the emergence of new property rights,’’ he argued, ‘‘takes place in
response to the desires of the interacting persons for adjustment to
new benefit-cost possibilities.’’15 When the private value of a good
rises, potential owners will agitate governments to change property rules
14
15

See Demsetz 1967; and Libecap 1989.
Demsetz 1967, 350.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

689

to allow capture of the added value. An increase in the value of the resource because of an exogenous circumstance, such as a technological
development, *** may create a sufficient incentive for the development of
property rights ***.
* * *
One dimension of this *** debate concerned the rules for ownership of
PGR – common heritage versus some form of property right. The other
dimension was the mechanism for allocating benefits from raw and
worked PGR. Even as states, in a Demsetzian dynamic, converged on a
property rights approach there remained strong disagreements over the
allocation of benefits. Developing countries desired state-controlled
mechanisms that would force PGR innovators to share the benefits with
those states that provided the raw PGR; industrialized states preferred a
more free-market approach.
The transformation of property and allocative rules over PGR did
not occur smoothly or according to a single plan ***. Nor did this
transformation occur through a single, omnibus negotiation aimed at the
creation of a new international regime. Rather, as we describe, there were
six distinct strands of activity, each of which addressed some important,
but partial, aspect of the PGR issue. Five of these strands are what we call
an elemental regime – an international institution, based on an explicit
agreement, that reflects agreed principles and norms and codifies specific
rules and decision-making procedures. Three of these elemental regimes
are focused on agriculture, and two extend far beyond agriculture to
broader issues:
The 1961 International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties
of Plants (UPOV), as amended in 1978 and 1991, governs property
rights over intentionally bred plant varieties. These treaties require
members to recognize ‘‘plant breeders’ rights,’’ a form of IP protection
widely implemented in industrialized countries.
 The United Nations (UN) Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) is
the locus for negotiation of two key accords: the 1983 International
Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources and the 2002 International
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources. ***
 The Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research
(CGIAR) is an international network of crop research centers. Efforts
to breed improved crops have been aided enormously by the tremendous wealth of samples in CGIAR’s ‘‘gene banks.’’


690

International Law and International Relations

The World Trade Organization (WTO)’s Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) sets minimum international standards for the protection of IP rights.
 The 1992 UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which
originated in efforts to protect global biodiversity as a natural resource,
simultaneously promotes the sharing of the economic benefits that arise
from the use of genetic resources.


In addition to these five international institutions, the PGR regime
complex has been influenced by activities at the domestic level, notably in
the United States, and, to a lesser degree, in the EU. The United States has
been a key driver of change in the IP field. Innovations that began in the
United States, such as the patenting of life-forms, have subsequently been
enshrined, partly as a result of U.S. insistence, in agreements such as TRIPs.
U.S. firms are also the dominant innovators in both the pharmaceutical
and agricultural industries.
Figure 26.1 illustrates these two dimensions of rules – ownership and
allocative mechanisms – and summarizes the complicated story that we
present below about the transformation from the common heritage
system to sovereign and private property rights.

The Common Heritage System
For most of human history, the rule of common heritage governed PGR.
*** [Under this system] there were no property rights in PGR, nor did
states bar access to genetic resources per se. As a result there was much
international diffusion of PGR, particularly as long-distance trade expanded and imperial nations established central collections, such as
Kew Gardens outside London, stocked with plants from around
the globe.16 To be sure, nations tried but often failed to maintain control over certain genetic resources; for example, China went to great
lengths to preserve the silkworm monopoly, but ultimately lost it to two
enterprising Nestorian monks.17 Silkworms, rubber trees, and a few other
special resources of obvious high value were the exception, however –
otherwise, genetic resources were free for anyone who bothered to take
them.

16
17

Kloppenburg 1988.
Stone 1994.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

691

Ownership of Plant Genetic Resources and
Mechanism for Allocating Benefits
Common heritage

Property rights
Sovereign
(state-controlled)

Marketbased

Traditional
19th-century
system

Private and
community
Late 20th-century
national patents:
U.S.
EU
TRIPs

Mechanism
for allocating
benefits
from PGR

UPOV treaties
FAO 1983
Undertaking
FAO 2001 Treaty
(R35, W35)

Regulated

CGIAR gene banks

FAO 1989 and
1991 revisions to
Undertaking

FAO 2001 Treaty
(other worked)

CBD (1992)
FAO 2001 Treaty
(other raw)
CGIAR gene banks
(immediately post1992, before FAO
2001 Treaty)

Note: The UN Food and Agriculture (FAO) Treaty distinguishes the rules that apply to
both raw (“R”) and worked (“W”) plant genetic resources (PGR) for a core group of 35
staple food crops, denoted “R35” and “W35.” The Consultative Group on International
Agriculture Research (CGIAR) gene banks operated on the principle of open access (with
regulated benefits – in the sense that the system was organized and maintained for public
purposes, not private, market-based innovations), but the creation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992 posed a challenge to that system by claiming sovereign
ownership of raw PGR. The FAO 2001 Treaty eliminated that challenge for the most
important food crops. The same rules apply to 29 crops used for animal feed.
TRIPs: Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
UPOV: International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants.
FIGURE

26.1. Two dimensions of debate.

692

International Law and International Relations

Under the common heritage system there was little difference in treatment between what we term ‘‘raw’’ and ‘‘worked’’ PGR. In agriculture, the
dividing line between raw and worked was (and often remains) indistinct
because worked materials, as well as new raw materials collected in the
field, are the source of new worked materials.18
The first moves toward propertizing PGR addressed worked resources.
*** By the 1920s, a limited, industrial business of breeding emerged, and
with it political pressure for protection arose. The most prominent innovative activity involved hybrid plants, which had their own built-in
mechanism for protecting IP – hybrids lose their vigor after one generation,
and thus farmers must purchase new seed every season.19 But many other
innovations were more difficult to protect, such as cuttings from fruit trees
that propagate asexually. Governments responded by tailoring special rules
to plant innovators. In 1930, the United States passed the Plant Patent Act,
allowing innovators to claim patents for plants that reproduce asexually.20
Most countries, however, stopped short of granting patents; if they granted
IP protection at all they did so through a limited mechanism known today
as ‘‘plant breeders’ rights.’’ These property rights barred plant breeders
from [the] outright copying of innovations, but the rights did not prevent
a breeder from using a competitor’s improved variety as an input to their
own new variety. This was an important step toward property rights in
PGR. ***
*** [The] 1961 UPOV agreement enshrined the concept of plant
breeders’ rights into international law.21 Plant breeders were concentrated
in the industrialized states that had the largest influence over UPOV’s
content, and the resulting UPOV agreement largely reflected their interests.
Updated with new agreements in 1978 and 1991, fifty states eventually
became parties to at least one of the UPOV agreements. * While UPOV
introduced property rights for worked PGR, raw PGR was still treated as
common heritage. Plant breeders and seed companies, as well as the major
botanical institutions, continued to gather PGR from around the world in
the belief that [raw genetic information could not be owned.]

18

19
20
21

Indeed, one of the major continuing areas of contestation has been the treatment of
traditional crop varieties that have been improved incrementally and informally by generations of farmers. This is the so-called ‘‘farmers’ rights’’ issue; we discuss it briefly below.
Griliches 1957.
Rories 2001.
Barton 1982. The United States also passed the Plant Variety Protection Act in 1970,
which extended the 1930 Act to sexually reproducing plants.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

693

The Demise of the Common Heritage System
While change was already afoot by the early 1960s, the major shock
to the common heritage system was the invention of recombinant
DNA technology in the 1970s.22 By allowing innovators to work directly
at the genetic level, the scope for innovation in plant resources increased
dramatically. This technological change stimulated interest in creating
stronger protection for worked PGR and ultimately in creating property
rights for raw PGR as well. In Demsetzian fashion, actors demanded
property rights in response to the possibility of increasing the value of
plant genetic resources and the desire to appropriate that value for
themselves. Most of the early changes in property rights occurred in the
United States, but this domestic activity created pressure for changes in
international rules.
The biotechnology revolution that began in the 1970s led to the creation of many new firms engaged in genetic engineering. These firms’ business models required secure property rights to reap the benefits of their
costly investments in research and development. A critical breakpoint in
this story was the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1980 decision, in the landmark
case of Diamond v. Chakrabarty, extending patent protection to living
modified organisms – in that particular case, genetically engineered
bacteria.23 Before Chakrabarty, the patentability of living innovations
outside the narrow confines of the 1930 Plant Patent Act was unclear.
After Chakrabarty, and subsequent cases that reaffirmed and extended it,
U.S. firms could receive complete utility patent protection for a panoply of
genomic techniques. That same year (1980), Congress passed the Bayh–
Dole Act, intended to encourage innovation by allowing universities and
private firms to claim property rights on government-funded research.
*** In short, these two changes – one judicial and one legislative –
transformed the U.S. domestic playing field with regard to property rights
in genetic resources. Since 1980, the conventional wisdom in the United
States has been that strong property rights – patents, in particular – are
essential to the modern biotechnology-based innovation system. U.S.
firms and the U.S. government sought to extend this new system
globally.24
22
23

24

Evenson 2002,
Diamond v. Chakrabarty (1980). Some doctrinal uncertainties remained that are not
germane to our argument; see Ex Parte Hibberd (1985), and JEM Ag Supply v. Pioneer
Hi-Bred (2001).
Ryan 1998.

694

International Law and International Relations

The increasing protection of worked PGR under the domestic laws of
industrialized nations as well as the UPOVagreement led developing countries to organize a counteroffensive: the 1983 FAO Undertaking on Plant
Genetic Resources. The FAO Undertaking, which is not legally binding,
was placed on the FAO agenda by a coalition of developing countries,
mainly from Latin America, and a small number of sympathetic industrialized countries. Often rich in biodiversity, developing countries have been
the source of many commercially valuable genetic samples. Yet the open
access regime gave them little compensation, even as arrangements such
as UPOV forced them to pay for innovations built (in part) on their own
genetic heritage. These concerns resonated with the then-recent effort to
establish a New International Economic Order, aimed at redistributing
global wealth through new international institutions and reining in the
powers of multinational corporations.25
The FAO Undertaking attempted to counter the emergence of property rights in worked PGR – such as in the UPOV agreements – by defining all genetic resources (raw and worked) as ‘‘common heritage.’’ In its
most controversial wording, the Undertaking propounded the ‘‘universally
accepted principle that plant genetic resources are a heritage of mankind
and consequently should be available without restriction;’’ PGR should
be available ‘‘free of charge . . . or on the most favorable terms.’’ ***
[The industrialized countries refused to accept the Undertaking’s demand
for open access to worked PGR.] Eight industrialized countries issued
formal reservations to the Undertaking. In 1989, FAO adopted an Annex
to the Undertaking to provide a general ‘‘agreed interpretation’’ that
papered over this conflict and allowed most of these hesitant countries
to join.26 ***
Biodiversity and Bioprospecting
The uneven but accelerating dissolution of the common heritage system
in the 1980s dovetailed with a new change afoot in an unlikely source:
international environmental cooperation. Protection of special habitats
(such as wetlands) and animals (such as whales) were politically expedient
choices for the first efforts at global environmental cooperation in the
1960s and 1970s. By the 1980s, however, conventional wisdom was that a
broader approach was needed. This conceptual shift was rooted in ideas
25
26

Gilpin 1987, 298–301.
FAO Annex 1 1989.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

695

from conservation biologists that stressed the need to protect entire
ecosystems and was consummated in the CBD ***.27
[In the late 1980s, when the CBD was taking shape,] developing
countries began to see property rights in PGR as a mechanism for securing
sovereignty and wealth, rather than solely as a device that ‘‘biopirates’’
from the North had rigged against them. *** The conceptual touchstone
for this new political coalition in favor of property rules was the notion of
‘‘bioprospecting.’’ Firms could prospect for valuable genetic resources just
as miners had prospected for gold in centuries past. A famous 1991 deal, in
which a U.S.-based pharmaceutical giant (Merck) contracted with a Costa
Rican conservation institute (INbio) for bioprospecting rights in the Costa
Rican rain forest, signaled to many the dawn of a new era of bioprospecting.28 This conceptual innovation aligned the interests of environmentalists, biotechnology firms, and developing countries that were seeking to
extract greater value from their biodiversity riches.29 [Subsequent
economic analyses – as well as a dearth of realized profits – suggest that
the value of rain forest genetic resources was considerably overestimated,
but in the 1990s the hopes for transformation were a more powerful elixir
than the econometrics.30]
*** [The] realization by developing countries that they could benefit
from asserting sovereign ownership over raw PGR was reflected much
more rapidly in the FAO’s Commission on Plant Genetic Resources. Unlike
the omnibus CBD, the FAO commission was focused solely on the issue of
PGR and thus could change course more nimbly ***. [In 1991, the FAO
adopted a new Annex stating that] ‘‘the concept of mankind’s heritage, as
applied in the [1983 Undertaking], is subject to the sovereignty of states
over their plant genetic resources.’’ It also flatly asserted that ‘‘nations have
sovereign rights over their plant genetic resources’’ – a complete reversal
of the 1983 Undertaking that sought to establish that no nation owned
PGR. [This almost exactly mirrored language in the draft texts, then
circulating, of the CBD.31] The draft CBD text also made clear that states
controlled access to PGR and that the open access norm of the past was
27

On the intellectual shift toward the ‘‘ecosystem’’ concept see Golley 1993; on the history
of wildlife protection, which until the late 1980s focussed on specific activities, regions
and ecosystems, see Lyster 1985.
28
See Tilford 1998 and Blum 1993.
29
Reid 1993.
[30 See Peters et al. 1989; and Godoy et al. 1993.]
31
The only difference being that the CBD language referred to all biological resources, not
just genetic resources.

696

International Law and International Relations

gone. Through these simultaneous assertions of sovereign rights in the
CBD and the FAO, a new approach to PGR coalesced.
The Legalization of Property Rights
The early 1990s represented a watershed in the development of the PGR
regime complex – the final break from the primacy of common heritage.
*** Yet the CBD was a broad agreement that had been crafted through a
process dominated by relatively weak environment ministries; likewise,
the FAO was dominated by agriculture ministries who also had limited
influence. Although abundant in symbolism, the CBD and FAO had only
minimal impact on the rules and practices that actually affected the
flow of genetic resources.
At the same time that the new FAO Annex and CBD were finalized,
nearly all the same states – represented by their more powerful trade
ministers – were also in the final stages of negotiating a new round of
international trade rules. These negotiations included a novel set of rules
on IP, which were placed on the trade agenda because firms in entertainment, Pharmaceuticals, and other ‘‘knowledge industries’’ insisted on
stronger international protection of IP. *** Backed by the power of the
United States, these rules were codified into TRIPs. TRIPs sets minimum
standards for IP protection; in practice these standards were closely
modeled on U.S. or EU law.32 Moreover, TRIPs was folded into the new
WTO structure, which included a powerful, retooled system for enforcing dispute settlement. The large number of developing countries that
joined the WTO seeking greater access to markets found that their membership also required a transformation in their domestic rules for IP. *
TRIPs contains specific language on genetic resources, which mandates that countries must grant patents for microorganisms and, in Article 27.3b, expressly requires either patents or a ‘‘sui generis’’ system for
worked PGR.33 The UPOV system of plant breeder rights was the concept that some TRIPs drafters had in mind for a sui generis system, but
not all states wanted to endorse UPOV, forcing the drafters to leave this
provision vague. These states instead sought clarity from the bottom
up – each state would interpret and implement Article 27.3b as it saw fit,
and a later systematic review would take stock of the experience. ***
32
33

See Maskus 2000; Ryan 1998; and Sell 1995.
A ‘‘sui generis’’ system simply means a unique system tailored, in this case, to the needs
of PGR.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

697

Thus from the mid-1980s, the number of international institutions
within the regime complex grew, and the boundaries between the elemental regimes blurred. This expansion was driven by the large number
of new issues that touched on PGR – such as protection of biological
diversity and the expanding agenda of international trade policy – as well
as the desire by key stakeholders to codify the emerging consensus in favor
of property rights. ***
The seismic change in property rules rippled through the rest of the
regime complex, affecting how key stakeholders saw their interests
served in many other rules. The main front line was now the allocation
of benefits from PGR – the second dimension in Figure 26.1. Should the
market be left to itself to allocate the benefits of PGR, or should governments regulate the allocation of benefits? Distributional issues often
confound efforts to secure property rights. As Libecap argues, ‘‘all things
equal, skewed rights arrangements lead to pressure for redistribution
through further negotiations.’’34 The history of PGR exemplifies this
pattern. Wary of market mechanisms, developing countries sought to
create special mechanisms that would force innovators to share the
benefit stream with the states that provided the raw PGR. Property rights
alone, these countries argued, would not be enough to force biopirates to
disgorge a fair share of profits.
These efforts to elaborate an international benefit-sharing scheme
arose mainly in the CBD ***. The widest in scope of all the elemental
regimes, the CBD was a convenient forum for actors who wanted to
expand the debate. At the same time, powerful states that wanted to
insulate the normative structure of other (in their view, more important)
elemental regimes – notably the WTO – often found it convenient to allow
the CBD to become a holding pen for these new concerns ***. The CBD
addressed the benefit-allocation issue through several controversial provisions. Most notably, it obligated each party to enact measures aimed at
‘‘sharing in a fair and equitable way . . . the benefits arising from the
commercial and other utilization of genetic resources with the [state]
providing such resources.’’35 This redistributive language was strongly
opposed by the United States, and contributed to the U.S. decision not to
ratify the CBD.
* * *
34
35

Libecap 2003.
Article 16. Similar language appears in Article 8(J) of the CBD. On the use of CBD as
a holding pen and the incentives to shift between regimes see Helfer 2004.

International Law and International Relations

698

CBD

Property

FAO
(other crops)

FAO Undertaking and Treaty
Common
heritage

pre-CGIAR
gene banks

FAO
(35 staple crops)

CGIAR gene banks

1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Shifting Rules Governing Ownership of “Raw”
Property

TRIPs
FAO
(other crops)

United States national laws
UPOV
FAO Undertaking and Treaty
Common
heritage

pre-CGIAR
gene banks
1960

FAO
(35 staple crops)

CGIAR gene banks
1970
1980
1990
“Worked” Plant Genetic Resources

2000

Note: Institutions shown only on panels for which they have relevant rules. The
International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), for
example, relates only to worked plant genetic resources (PGR). Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) gene banks are shown as “raw,” although
perhaps two-fifths of their collections have been worked in some way. The Convention
on Biological Diversity (CBD) is not shown on panel B, although the CBD does include a
clause that pertains to worked PGR.
Lines shift at major events that alter the rules within a given institution.
Major events for raw PGR: The annex to the International Undertaking (1991); the UN
Food and Agriculture (FAO) treaty that distinguishes rules for 35 staple crops from those
for nonstaples (2001).
Major events for worked PGR: The U.S. Plant Variety Protection Act (1970) and the
Diamond case in the United States (1980); revisions to UPOV (1978, 1991); the annex
to the International Undertaking (1991).
TRIPs: Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
FIGURE

26.2. Changes in property norms for raw and worked PGR.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

699

In sum, by the end of the 1990s the international rules governing PGR
were radically different from those that existed seventy-five years earlier.
Figure 26.2 summarizes this shift – for raw PGR (top panel) as well as
‘‘worked’’ PGR (bottom panel).
*** [The realignment of the late 1990s did not erase existing political
controversies.] Thus international norms were cast broadly to allow
some diversity in local circumstances. *** In some cases, such as the core
crop plants addressed by the 2002 FAO treaty (discussed below), the costs
of administering property rights turned out to be so high that states
collectively reverted to the common heritage concept – an outcome
consistent with sophisticated versions of the Demsetzian thesis.36 As
property theorists have noted, a resource will operate without property
rights as long as the cost of implementing and enforcing property rights
is ‘‘higher than the value of the increase in the efficiency of utilization of
the resource gained by the introduction of a property regime.’’37 This was
the case for many common food crops because of the extreme difficulty
of demarcating and enforcing property rights – and the relatively small
gains from doing so in this area – and consequently the system revived
the common heritage approach in this circumscribed domain.38 On the
whole, however, the demands for property rights in PGR were largely
met by the mid-1990s. Enclosure had triumphed over common heritage
and open access.

regime complexes and the study of regimes
Many studies of international cooperation have noted the tremendous
rise in the number of international treaties and organizations, particularly since 1945.39 Yet few studies have given systematic attention to the
implications of this increase in institutional density.40 *** This rise in
density occurs against a backdrop of increasing legalization in world politics. The international legal system is, however, nonhierarchical: generally,
36
37
38

39

40

See Libecap 1989; Merrill, 2002; and Levmore 2002.
Benkler 2002, 402.
See the list in the 2002 FAO Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources. As Libecap notes, the
physical nature of an asset affects the cost of calculating and assigning value, in turn
affecting the costs of marking and enforcing property rights. Libecap 2003, 150.
Shanks et al. 1996. In-depth studies of particular areas of international cooperation –
such as trade, arms control, or human rights – all point to the same general pattern of
rising numbers of institutions.
Partial exceptions include Young 2002; Stokke 2001; and Leebron 2002.

700

International Law and International Relations

no one regime is supreme over others as a legal matter. Moreover, the
international legal system is disaggregated. Regimes and rules are developed in one forum that frequently implicate or even challenge regimes
and rules developed in other forums.
As the PGR case illustrates, one result of rising density in this context is
the development of overlapping but discrete regimes, often with conflicting
rules during periods of transition to new interests and rules. ***
In the remainder of this article we use the PGR case to illustrate and
probe the conjectures about regime complexes described in the introduction. Our argument is not that existing regime theory is fatally flawed,
but rather that it is oriented around a model of regime development that
fails to reflect the growing concentration and interconnection of institutions in the international system.
No Clean Slate
Existing scholarship on international regimes has generally, if implicitly,
assumed that the process of regime formation begins with an institutional clean slate. In most empirical studies of regime formation negotiators arrive at the task of creating a regime without any explicit
international rules in place; previous arrangements – if they exist at all –
are readily discarded or adjusted. In these accounts, states with different
interests vie to shape the outcomes, and institutions are crafted to serve
the political agreement. ***
In a regime complex, by contrast, negotiations over most substantive rules commence with an elaborate and dispersed institutional framework already in place. The institutional slate is not clean. Ideas, interests,
and expectations frequently are already aligned around some set of existing rules and concepts ***. Consequently, power, interests, and ideas do
not directly map onto the norms that become enshrined in the agreements
at the core of the regime; the content and evolution of rules does not
trace neatly back to changes in the underlying driving forces. We expected
that the lack of a clean slate would affect the development of the rules in
the elemental regimes in a path-dependent manner – and, consequently,
the evolution of regime complex as a whole. Despite the history of PGR
being one of dramatic change – a normative shift, over many years, from
common heritage to propertization – in many respects this expectation was
borne out. We found path dependence at the meso scale, in that particular
rules affected and constrained the architecture of subsequent rules. Yet at
the macro scale the regime complex exhibited marked change.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

701

One example of how previous expectations and institutional accretion
affect outcomes in a regime complex is the creation of strong property
rights for worked PGR. When negotiators in TRIPs began crafting rules
for PGR in the late 1980s, there were several sets of rules already firmly
in place. For decades, the community of plant breeders had built up the
concept of plant breeders’ rights and enshrined it in both international
and domestic law. Some who opposed even this weak form of IP, predominantly concentrated in the developing world, had already established
a marker in the 1983 FAO Undertaking. ***
With conflicting interests as well as divergent rules already on the books,
it was impossible to gain consensus on a single approach to property rights.
Yet the TRIPs negotiation, part of the omnibus Uruguay Round, could not
be halted, so the negotiators adopted a broad umbrella approach. *** This
approach contrasts sharply with more familiar cases of regime formation
such as that of the Montreal Protocol on ozone depletion, where
negotiators had diverging interests but the negotiation process was unconstrained by existing rules on ozone depleting chemicals.41 Faced with a
clean institutional slate, the Montreal Protocol negotiators could strike a
political compromise that directly reflected the power, interests, and
knowledge within that issue-area, codified in precise rules with unambiguous timetables. The negotiators in the ozone regime were worried about
how their decisions might affect other issue-areas – notably, they feared
that provisions to apply trade sanctions against countries that refused to
implement the Protocol’s rules would run afoul of the GATT. The negotiators solved the problem by crafting trade restrictions narrowly and trying
to navigate around any possible interactions with other regimes. * The
negotiators of PGR provisions in TRIPs – which overlapped with rules
being adopted in the FAO as well as in the CBD and the international gene
bank system – faced a quite different situation. A multiplicity of overlapping rules and norms made it impossible to create a legal system that
was isolated from the other elemental regimes.
The lack of a clean slate has at least two implications for the evolution of rules in a regime complex. First, when wary of conflicts between
rules, the architects of new rules will attempt to avoid conflicts by demarcating clear boundaries. They will negotiate devices such as ‘‘savings
clauses’’ and other mechanisms for disentangling one regime from another
***. Disentangling and demarcation appear to be viewed as a first best
solution ***. (In a few cases, however, we observe explicit efforts to create
41

See Benedick 1991; and Parson 2003.

702

International Law and International Relations

conflicts to force change in another regime – what we term ‘‘strategic
inconsistency’’ – which we also discuss further below.)
Second, the sheer complexity of the interactions at high institutional
density suggests that it will often prove difficult to demarcate boundaries
clearly. In this context, the PGR case suggests that rules may evolve by
a special pattern. When PGR-related matters have been linked to a much
larger array of issues, the negotiating processes usually arrived at some
agreement even when views were diverse and conflicting. *** Analysts
often assume that broader negotiations allow for ‘‘negotiation arithmetic’’
that explores tradeoffs and seeks Pareto-superior deals.42 However, in the
PGR regime complex the benefits or detriments of issue linkage were
not critical ***. The ‘‘agreements’’ that resulted were usually broad to
paper over differences, deferring resolution until later. The TRIPs rules on
PGR exemplify this.
A quite different pattern appeared in elemental regimes that were
specialized for PGR purposes – such as the FAO Undertaking. Unsurprisingly, serious negotiations yielded rapid agreement when key stakeholders shared core interests. For example, in the late 1980s the FAO
was the first elemental regime to shift from the principle of common heritage
to rules that allowed states to assert sovereign ownership of raw PGR.
Indeed, the FAO employed exactly the language that was under negotiation
in the CBD before it had been adopted in the CBD. The substantive
narrowness of the FAO process made this rapid shift possible. ***
This pattern of evolution may help to explain why some interactions
between elemental regimes are supportive and others yield rules that
clash. The narrow, specialized elemental regimes that were under less political pressure to reach agreement tended to codify rules that reflected
an emerging consensus. But agreements reached under pressure of a
credible political deadline – such as the CBD and WTO – tended to yield
more conflict. The CBD, for example, contained language on the scope
of IP rights and requirements that governments adopt schemes to share
the benefits of worked PGR – language that the U.S. government and
many firms saw as aimed at undermining TRIPs.43 The PGR case suggests
a propensity for negotiators in highly complex areas to adopt broad and
general agreements, if only because some of the complexity and conflict
may resolve itself autonomously – in the sense that exogenous events or
new political shifts may in time render the underlying conflict moot.
42
43

See Sebenius 1983; and Tollison and Willett 1979.
Raustiala 1997.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

703

Thus the 1989 Annex to the FAO Undertaking was a general effort to
paper over different interpretations of the concept of ‘‘common heritage,’’
which just two years later was made obsolete by new interests that
favored sovereign property rights.
Forum Shopping
The defining characteristic of a regime complex is the existence of
multiple, overlapping elemental regimes. Given the availability of multiple
fora for developing or elaborating international rules, we expected actors would attempt to select the forum that best suited their interests. The
PGR case is consistent with this expectation.
The FAO, for example, served as the forum for the 1983 Undertaking
that declared both raw and worked PGR to be the common heritage of
all mankind. As part of the UN system and open to all states, the FAO
was dominated by developing countries and thus became a favorable
forum for asserting demands for wealth redistribution. By contrast, the
United States and (to a lesser extent) the EU sought a different forum –
the trade negotiations leading to the WTO – to push for new IP rules.
The omnibus nature of WTO commitments and the exclusive membership criteria created high barriers to entry and made it easier for the
United States to link IP issues *** to broader market access. ***
Created under the auspices of the UN Environment Programme, the
negotiations that lead to the CBD originally centered on conservation
***. The UN Environment Programme (like FAO) was an open forum
with low barriers to entry. Thus developing countries found it relatively
easy to graft their IP agenda onto the CBD negotiations. What they were
unable to achieve in other fora – notably TRIPs – developing countries
tried to gain through linkages to biodiversity. The result was two
diverging and distinct sets of rules, with the CBD rules on IP – mostly
related to benefit-sharing – partly undercutting those in TRIPs. This
divergence in substantive rules occurred despite the fact that the CBD
and the WTO have broadly the same membership. The two institutions
offered two distinct fora, with different bureaucratic representation,
leading to different expressions of state interests and issue linkages. ***
Legal Consistency
Noting the general trend toward legalization in world politics, we expected that regime complexes would evolve in ways that reflect the increased

704

International Law and International Relations

role of legal arguments and legal concepts in international cooperation.44
One of the signal attributes of this shift to law is pressure for legal
consistency. We expected that it might be extremely difficult to maintain
legal consistency within a regime complex because of the complexity of
issues and interests in the far-flung elemental regimes [and because the
international legal system has no formal hierarchy of treaty rules.] ***
We found that the drive for consistency – a hallmark of legalization – has
had a strong impact on the evolution of the PGR regime complex. The
extremely large number of issues and complex interactions made it difficult for negotiators to ensure legal consistency; areas of persistent inconsistency became focal points for efforts at reconciliation and further
bargaining. States responded to legal inconsistency in two linked ways.
They first attempted to implement or interpret international norms such
that inconsistencies evaporated. If those efforts failed then the inconsistencies set the agenda for subsequent negotiations. We find that these
inconsistencies rarely persist within each elemental regime; rather, they
arise at the ‘‘joints’’ between the elemental regimes.
This mode of development – driven by concern about achieving legal
consistency – is illustrated in several conflicts surrounding PGR. ***
For example, when states in the late 1990s took up the task of
negotiating the first protocol to the CBD – the Biosafety Protocol, intended
to regulate trade in bio-engineered goods – they did so against the
backdrop of provisions in the WTO that prohibited discriminatory
barriers to trade.45 The result was a massive bargaining effort focused
on a ‘‘savings clause:’’ a legal provision inserted into the Biosafety
Protocol that purported to immunize the WTO provisions from any
inconsistency with the Biosafety Protocol. Similarly, the negotiation of
the new Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources in the FAO was conducted
against the backdrop of TRIPs and its strict IP rules. The result was
a debate over whether to include a savings clause with the same aim: to
protect the TRIPs provisions in the event of any inconsistency between
the treaties. (Whether these savings clauses actually help to demarcate
boundaries and establish priorities in the application of conflicting laws
remains a proposition that lawyers debate).46

44
45

46

Goldstein et al. 2001.
Notably the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on the
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures – both part of the Uruguay Round
negotiations.
Safrin 2002.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

705

While efforts at achieving consistency drive much of the action
within a regime complex, [states] may also attempt to create what we
term strategic inconsistency. Cognizant that the growing legalization of
world politics means that legal conflicts focus efforts at solutions, states at
times attempt to force change by explicitly crafting rules in one elemental
regime that are incompatible with those in another. For example, developing countries led the establishment of the original FAO Undertaking in a radical attempt to refocus the agenda toward a broad and
controversial common heritage principle for all PGR. The CBD’s rules
on IP rights are another example – the CBD purposefully included language that [appeared to contravene the content of TRIPs.] For diplomats
operating in a legalized setting, the existence of a glaring inconsistency
across regimes sets the agenda for future efforts, which in the legal
paradigm typically focus on ways to restore rule alignment.
Regime Development Through Implementation
In the traditional model of regime development, parties that seek a change
in regime rules press their cause through formal negotiations leading
to new rules; the implementation process follows thereafter in a ‘‘top
down’’ fashion. Rules beget changes in behavior and compliance. The
actual practice of regime implementation, however, is not linear or neat.
Earlier studies have shown that when international rules are demanding and intrusive, they are more likely to conflict with other national
commitments – making it difficult to plan and anticipate the process of
implementation.47 ***
We hypothesize that the existence of a regime complex resolves this
tension in favor of a ‘‘bottom up’’ style of evolution. Negotiators adopt
broad rules because it is extremely difficult to work out the fine detail for
all contingencies ex ante. Where that is not possible, they adopt specific
rules that often yield conflicts in other elemental regimes. This approach,
amply evident in the PGR case, in effect relies on the implementation
process for experimentation with different solutions to the ambiguities
and inconsistencies that arise from divergent rules and interests. The
parties used their implementation experiences as guides for subsequent
changes in the formal rules. This process certainly occurs in the domestic
context.48 In that setting, however, courts often exist to elaborate and fill
47
48

See Victor, Raustiala, and Skolnikoff 1998; and Evans, Jacobson, and Putnam 1993.
See Ingram 1977; Bardach and Kagan 1982; and Stewart 1975.

706

International Law and International Relations

gaps in statutes; internationally, aside from a handful of distinctive
regimes, courts do not exist to play that role. This implies that the feedback loop from implementation to formal rules is even more significant in
the international than in the domestic context. Three episodes in the
history of the PGR regime complex reveal this bottom-up process of rule
development through implementation and interpretation.
First, the evolution of access rules for the international gene banks
shows how incompatible interests led states to adopt broad rules with
the hope that conflicts could be resolved ex post as implementation
progressed. The CGIAR system was built on the principle of common
heritage. The system’s gene banks were open to all, a core principle
challenged when developing countries shifted preferences in the late
1980s toward sovereign rights over raw PGR. ***
[The solution was codified in the 2002 Treaty on Plant Genetic
Resources.] The treaty’s principal purpose was to resolve some of the
inconsistencies that had arisen in the regime complex. It created a special
‘‘multilateral system’’ for core crop resources, including the collections
of raw PGR in the gene banks. In a sea of sovereign and private property,
it carves out a special collective property right for a limited number of
staple food and feed crops:
In essence, the multilateral system is a communal seed treasury composed of 35
food and 29 feed crops . . . in exchange for access to this common seed pool, those
who commercialize products that incorporate plant genetic resources received
from the multilateral system must pay a percentage of their profits into a fund to
be administered by the Treaty’s Governing Body. That fund will be used to
promote conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources, particularly
by farmers and indigenous communities, whose rights and contributions to
genetic diversity the [2002 Treaty] expressly recognizes.49

For these key crops, the economic gains from property rights were
outweighed by the costs of creating and policing those rights, and thus
actors sought a reversal of propertization. This solution was the culmination of a process that, we suggest, is a generic feature of regime complexes. The parties started with broad and conflicting rules. They tried to
work out the problems, attempting first those solutions that were easiest
to implement – actions ‘‘on the ground’’ that sought to interpret and
adjust legal commitments in favorable ways. As those failed they sought
remedies that required progressively greater legal coordination – creating
a new legal agreement as the last resort.
49

Helfer 2002.

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

707

A second example of evolution through implementation is the ongoing
attempt at reconciliation of the various weak forms of IP for improved
plant varieties, *** with the strong patents that many countries now grant.
TRIPs accepts all of these systems because it was impossible to gain
agreement on a precise rule ex ante ***. The TRIPs architects hoped that
the implementation process would reveal which systems were most
compatible with the diverse interests involved, and they built in a planned
review of those experiences as a result. This review is proceeding slowly
*** which underscores an earlier point about the dynamics of a regime
complex: the codification of international norms is driven by credible
deadlines, but the implementation process often drags on because
politically the easiest solution in the face of conflict is to keep the rules
broad and then defer the details until later.
The third example, still ongoing, involves two recent concepts in IP:
‘‘farmers’ rights’’ and ‘‘traditional knowledge.’’ [Modern IP law is] largely
organized to protect discrete innovations that occur at a moment in time
by identifiable persons; they are generally unable to protect innovations
that reflect the slow accumulation of novel concepts by many (unknown)
members of a community.50 Farmers’ rights are ‘‘rights arising from the
past, present and future contribution of farmers in conserving, improving,
and making available plant genetic resources.’’51 *** From the 1970s, the
farmers’ rights movement called into question the dividing line between
raw and worked resources, asserting that much of what is taken to be
raw is in fact worked. *** The farmer’s rights movement has gained
momentum as a broader group of indigenous communities – not just
farmers – have realized that they could be victims of the same dividing
line between ‘‘raw’’ and ‘‘worked’’ knowledge. As this broader coalition
organized, it adopted a more general term: ‘‘traditional knowledge.’’
*** Thus far efforts to protect traditional knowledge and to mandate
the sharing of benefits that arise from its commercial use have not yielded
much practical change ***. Now the World Intellectual Property Organization, which has been a peripheral actor in the PGR story, has convened
a new working group to generate rules that recognize and reward
traditional knowledge. This development may herald the arrival of
a new element in the PGR regime complex. We expect that advocates for
traditional knowledge will seek, through new WIPO rules, strategic
inconsistency in the rules governing the allocation of benefits from PGR,
50
51

Boyle 1997.
FAO 1995.

708

International Law and International Relations

which in turn will force efforts to resolve the conflict through the various
mechanisms and processes we have illustrated.

conclusion
Genetic resources, while seemingly esoteric, are increasingly an arena of
global conflict in world politics. The struggle over the control of plant
genetic resources is at the core of this battle. During the past century, the
international rules for PGR protection shifted quite dramatically from a
common heritage, open access system to a system of sovereign resource
rights and private intellectual property rights. We have argued that this
transition was driven by the perception – and the reality – of the rising value
of PGR, in particular as new techniques of genetic manipulation permitted
innovators to add substantial value to plants. Propertization, initially
resisted by the plant-rich developing world, decisively triumphed over
common heritage.
This transition to an international property rights system did not
occur smoothly. Rule evolution in the PGR case involved several distinct
but overlapping international regimes interacting with each other as well as
the domestic practices of key states. Whereas existing studies of international regimes have generally focused on regimes as single, self-contained
entities, often built around a single treaty, the hallmark of the PGR story is
the lack of any central, hierarchical international institution. The principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures that govern PGR have
arisen and evolved in ways that are distinct from the existing body of theory
about international regimes [– a regime complex rather than a regime.] The
horizontal, overlapping structure and the presence of divergent rules and
norms are the defining characteristics of a regime complex.
The regime complex for plant genetic resources is unlikely to be the
first or the last such institution in world politics. Indeed, there are good
reasons to believe that regime complexes will become much more common in coming decades as international institutions proliferate and inevitably bump against one another. *** Indeed, regime complexes may
already be abundant – looking through this new conceptual lens, regime
complexes may appear where previously analysts saw only individual
decomposable regimes. ***
*** In a regime complex rules evolve against a thick backdrop of
existing rules: there is no clean institutional slate on which actors pursue interests or wield power. This backdrop defines the regime complex
but also generates its distinctive dynamics. In an international system

The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources

709

characterized by increasing legalization, the lack of legal consistency that
flows from differing and overlapping rules pushes states to seek resolutions
and to negotiate broad rules. At times, states also create strategic inconsistency as they seek to jolt rules in one or another direction.
Our work on regime complexes suggests not only some extensions
for the theories of regimes but also advances the study of legalization in
world politics. A hallmark of the regime complex is a shift in the locus
of action – away from elemental regimes and toward legal inconsistencies
that tend to arise at the joints between regimes, and away from formal
negotiations and toward the more complicated processes of implementation and interpretation. As the scope of the regime complex grows and
rules become more demanding and intrusive, the style of rule change shifts
ever more to this more messy and complicated ‘‘bottom-up’’ system and
away from the top-down mechanisms that are implicitly assumed in
[mainstream regime scholarship.] *** More research that uses regime
complexes as the unit of analysis will reflect a growing empirical reality.
This type of research will also extend one of the most productive research
programs in international relations – the study of international regimes –
by integrating insights from studies on law and legalization, policy
implementation and the role of institutions.

References

While citations within articles have been maintained, complete references
have been omitted from the book. However, a complete set of references
for each of the chapters in the book may be found at http//:www.
cambridge.org/9780521861861.

711

Index

Note: Page numbers printed in italics followed by a lower-case f or t refer respectively to
figures and tables.
Abbott, Kenneth W., 121, 126, 136, 158n1,
194n19, 195n25, 569, 570, 595,
597n12, 597n14, 614
acceptance stage, of norm development,
278–9
access: and control of dispute resolution,
137–40; as dimension of delegation,
131–2; and rules for international gene
banks, 705–706; and transnational
dispute resolution, 143, 144–7, 151
accidents, cease-fire agreements and control
of, 522–3
Adelman, Kenneth, 313n48
adjudication, judicial independence and
control of, 133–6
administered protection, and trade
agreements, 177–8
Afghanistan: and interstate territorial
aggressions, 274t; Soviet intervention
in, 228n78
Africa: decolonization and sovereignty in,
209–12; and dual civil regimes, 218–23;
and juridical statehood, 215–18,
223–31; quasi-states and sovereignty in,
212–15; study of sovereignty in context
of, 205–207; and territorial wars, 276.
See also Organization of African Unity
(OAU)
African Charter on Human Rights (1981),
231
AFTA. See ASEAN Free Trade Area
agency, performative model of, 410–11
agenda setting, at GATT/WTO, 554–6

Aggarwal, Vinod K., 8, 26n19
aggression: use of term, 268n35; and war
crimes tribunals, 614. See also warfare
agreements: and ‘‘agreements in principle’’ as
contractually binding, 317n57;
ceasefires and strength of, 523, 527–8,
529t, 530–1 ; and demand for regimes,
29–31, 38; distinction between
‘‘regimes’’ and, 29; renegotiation and
agreements shock, 389n20. See also
informal agreements; treaties
agriculture, and import bans, 498–500.
See also plant genetic resources; UN
Food and Agriculture Organization
Albright, Madeline, 594
Alesina, Alberto, 342n30
Alexandrowicz, Charles, 225
Algeria, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t
alliances: and commitments, 45, 56–63; and
realism, 312n47, 630n27; and
reputations of states, 311n45
Allison, Graham T., 69n8
Almond, Gabriel, 48–9
Alter, Karen, 136, 139
altruism, and human rights, 651
ambiguity, and compliance, 77–80, 106
Amnesty International, 616
anarchy, in international relations theory,
121
Andean Pact, 334n6, 345t, 350, 354t, 356,
358t, 362t, 363t, 364t, 366t, 368t
Anderson, Malcolm, 261n13, 281n48

713

714

Index

Andreski, Stanislav, 213
Anti-Ballistic Missiles (ABM) Treaty, 102–103
antitrade groups, and mobilization, 163–8
antitrust law, and informal agreements,
313n49
ANZCERTA. See Australia-New Zealand
Closer Economic Relations Trade
Agreement
appropriateness, institution design and logic
of, 407–409
Arab-Israeli war (1948), 515, 525–6, 530,
535n34
Arab League, 266
Argentina, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t
Armenia, and territorial boundaries of
Azerbeijan, 277
arms control: and deep cooperation,
101–104; and informal agreements,
316–18; and logic of appropriateness,
407. See also START; Strategic Arms
Limitation Talks
Arrow, Kenneth J., 27, 561n63
ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), 345t, 350,
351t, 358t, 362t, 364t, 366t, 371
Ashanti, and sovereignty in African context,
208
Ashley, Richard, 223n62
Association of East Caribbean States,
228n78
Association of Small Island States, 72
asymmetry: and bargaining power at
GATT/WTO, 552–3; and dispute
settlement design, 342; of information,
36; in trade pacts, 357–72
Atiyah, Patrick S., 302n19
atrocities regime. See war crimes tribunals
audience costs, and ceasefires, 521, 539
Aust, Anthony, 301n14
Australia, and League mandates after World
War I, 282
Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic
Relations Trade Agreement
(ANZCERTA), 345t, 351t, 362t, 363t,
364t, 365, 366t, 368t
Axelrod, Robert, 402
Azca´rate, Pablo de, 538n38
Azerbaijan, and territorial boundaries, 277
Baltic Free Trade Agreement (FTA), 345t,
351t, 358t, 362t, 364t, 365t, 367t

Bangladesh: and secession from Pakistan,
276n37, 530n29; and territorial
aggressions, 275t
Bank of International Settlements, 593n59
Barber case (1990), 501–503
bargaining: and agreement shock, 389n20;
and dispute settlement design, 340; and
economic power, 381–2; and
GATT/WTO decision making, 547–60;
side-payments and ‘‘spillover’’ in,
33–4. See also negotiations
Barkun, Michael, 73n18
Barnet, Michael, 46n12, 266, 433
Barsoom, Peter N., 116n1, 401
Bass, Gary Jonathan, 647n68
Baumgartner, Frank R., 437n21
Baxter, Richard, 311, 330
Bayard, Thomas, 104, 107
Bayh-Dole Act (U. S., 1980), 693
Becker, Gary S., 304n24
Bedjaoui, Mohammed, 222, 228
behavior theory: of the firm, 20; of the state,
632n30, 632n32. See also patterned
behavior; regional behavior
Beitz, Charles R., 223n63
Belarus, and reform of CIS tribunal,
367n43
Belgium, and boundaries after World War I,
282
Benedick, Richard, 70
Bennett, Christopher, 376n3
Bickel, Alexander, 484n95
Bienen, Henry, 50, 61n52
Bierwagen, Rainer M., 355n33
Bilder, Richard B., 303n22, 376n1
Bilka case (1986), 501
binding agreements: and informal
agreements, 305, 306; and trade rules,
172–6
biodiversity, and developing countries,
694–5
Biosafety Protocol, 704
biotechnology revolution, and plant genetic
resources, 693
Biysk, Alison, 627
Blair, Tony, 608n63
Blitzer, Wolf, 297n7
Bobrow, Davis B., 37n41
Bolivia, and free trade agreements, 346t,
359t, 363t. See also Andean Pact
Bordo, Michael D., 377n5

Index
Bosnia: and interstate territorial aggressions,
272t, 279, 285; and war crimes
tribunals, 598–602
boundaries: declining importance of
interstate, 259; and evolution of
integrity norm since 1945, 265–79;
history of international from
1648–2000, 260–5; and new territorial
order, 279–87
Brandt, Willy, 393
Brasserie du Peˆcheur case (1994), 508, 509
Braudel, Fernand, 14
Brazil, and free trade agreements, 369n44
Bretton Woods system, 293–4, 568–9, 574, 591
Briggs, Herbert W., 303n23
Britain: and decolonization, 648n70; and
European Court of Justice rulings on
agricultural products, 499; and
Genocide Convention, 446; and
interstate territorial aggressions, 273t;
and monetary policy, 580n44; and
restrictions on submarine warfare,
250–4; and state responsibility for
violation of EU law, 507
British Telecommunications case (1996),
508, 509
Brown, L. Neville, 466n31
Brown, Michael E., 619n109
Brownlie, Ian, 215, 218n44
Brunne´e, Jutta, 190n9, 194n19
Buchanan, James, 30n23, 424n59
buffer zones, and ceasefires, 542
Bulgaria, and free trade agreements, 345t,
346t, 347t, 349t, 353t, 358t, 362t,
363t, 364t, 366t
Bull, Hedley, 3, 14–15, 121, 206, 207,
208n12, 214, 232, 260, 596n10
Bunn, George, 393, 397, 400
bureaucracy: and concept of legal
bureaucratization, 187; and
organizational culture, 239–40
Burkina Faso, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 272t
Burley, Anne-Marie, 52n36
Burma, and interstate territorial aggressions,
274t
Burns, Richard Dean, 242n17
Bush, George W., 450n46
CACM. See Central American Common
Market

715

Calvo, Michael A., 295n4
Calvo-Goller, Notburga K., 295n4
Cambodia: genocide and war crimes
tribunals, 449n45, 451, 611–12; and
interstate territorial aggressions,
275t
Canada: and free trade agreements, 346t,
359t, 363t; and human rights, 192
capability, and compliance, 80–4, 106
Caracciolo, Roberto, 396
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), 345t,
352t, 358t, 362t, 363t, 364t, 366t,
368t
Carr, E. H., 233, 419–20, 618, 626
Carter, Barry E., 65n1
Carter, Jimmy, 309n37, 314n51, 662
case selection strategy, for study of European
Court of Justice, 488–9
Cassis de Dijon case, 139, 147
causal relationships: in analysis of regimes,
6–10; and microassessment of norms in
organizational culture, 248–54; and
rational-design theory, 404–405
CBD. See UN Convention on Biological
Diversity
CEAO. See West African Economic
Community
ceasefires: and contract theory, 516; and
cooperation theory, 517–25; duration
of, 515; econometric model of, 525–42;
and realism, 516. See also peace
Central African Customs and Economic
Union (UDEAC), 350t, 351t, 358t,
362t, 363t, 364t, 366t, 368t
Central American Common Market
(CACM), 345t, 350, 354t, 356, 358t,
363t, 364t, 366t, 368t, 371
Central American Court of Justice, 145
Central and East European Country Pacts
(CEEC), 345t, 351t
Central European Free Trade Agreement
(CEFTA), 346t, 351t, 358t, 362t, 363t,
365t, 367t
Chad, and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t, 272t
Chamberlain, Austen, 255
Charmasson case (1983), 498–9
Charter of Paris for a New Europe (1990),
266
Chayes, Abram & Antonia, 93–4, 102,
116n1, 335n9

716

Index

chemical warfare (CW), 244–5, 246t, 247,
255–6
Chile, and free trade agreements, 346t, 352t,
355, 358t, 359t, 362t, 363t, 364t, 366t.
See also Andean Pact
China: and human rights treaties, 192; and
interstate territorial aggressions, 274t,
275t
Chinkin, Christine M., 194n19
Chirac, Jacques, 608n63
choice, in institution design, 416–18. See
also constraint-choice analysis;
rational-choice theory
Christopher, Paul, 595n4
CIS. See Commonwealth of Independent
States
civil regimes, and sovereignty in context of
Africa, 207–10, 218–23
Clark, David H., 370n45
classical theory, and juridical statehood,
223–4
classification societies, and oil pollution
control, 678, 680
Clemenceau, Georges, 328n80
Clinton, Bill, 450n46, 608n63, 614, 615
closure, and agenda-setting process at
GATT/WTO, 554–6
Coase, Ronald, 30
Coase theorem, 29, 30–1, 174n24
Cobban, Alfred, 221n54
coercion: and compliance with oil pollution
control treaties, 679–80; and power
tactics at GATT/WTO, 552–3
coherence, and precision of rules, 124n15
coincidental compliance, and realism, 657
Cold War: GATT/WTO bargaining in
context of, 556–60; and spheres of
influence, 121; and tacit agreements,
321–2; and territorial revisionism,
280n44, 285n59
collective-action problems, in institution
design, 406
collective property rights, for staple food and
feed crops, 706
Colombia, and free trade agreements, 346t,
358t, 364t
colonialism: and ‘‘peoples’ rights,’’ 229; and
self-determination, 216n44; and
sovereignty in African context, 209–10;
UN Resolutions condemning, 217.
See also decolonization

Commission of the European Communities,
462
commitments: and alliance behavior, 56–63;
as critical dimension of international
system, 44; and democracy, 45, 46–56,
63–4; informal agreements and binding,
304–10; and liberal view of human
rights, 632–6; monetary system and
legal forms of, 576–84; relationship
between domestic politics and
international, 44–5
common good, power in service of, 11–12
common heritage system, for plant genetic
resources, 688, 690–4, 699, 703, 708
common interests, and dynamics of
integration, 464, 478–9
common market(s), and free trade
agreements, 361
Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa (COMESA), 347t, 352t, 356,
358t, 362t, 363t, 364t, 366t, 368t
Common Market Law Review (journal),
468
Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR), 349t, 350, 353t, 359t,
362t, 364t, 366t, 368t, 371
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
265, 347t, 354t, 356, 359t, 363t, 365,
366t, 367, 368t, 369
communicative rationality, and institutional
design, 422–3
community law: and European Court of
Justice, 459n5; and European
integration, 469–72, 476–7
comparative statics, and agreement
flexibility, 386–90
compensation, and trade agreements, 178–9
compliance: acceptable levels of, 84–90; and
ambiguity, 77–80, 105; approaches to
improvement of, 90–1; and background
assumptions, 66–74; and capability,
80–4; causes and cures of
noncompliance and, 105–109;
endogeneity and selection problems in
cooperation and, 95–9; and evaluation
of enforcement needs, 99–109; future of
cooperation and, 109–11; and
international monetary system,
585–90, 592; and legalism in dispute
resolution for trade pacts, 340–4; and
managerial thesis on cooperation, 93–5,

Index
104, 105, 106, 110; and norms, 74–6;
and oil pollution control, 654–5,
658–83; and politics of dispute
resolution, 144–9; regime design to
improve, 681–3; theory and definition
of, 655–8; and transparency, 95; and
varieties of noncomplying behavior,
76–7; and verification problem, 66.
See also cooperation; deterrence;
enforcement; treaties
compromise, and duration and renegotiation
of agreements, 396–8
compulsory jurisdiction, and European
Court of Human Rights, 637
concordance, of norms, 237, 239, 243
Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), 266, 279, 288
confidence-building measures, and
ceasefires, 522, 536t, 537
confidential deliberation, and European
Court of Human Rights, 641–6
Congo, and sovereignty in African context,
211–12, 216
consensus, and decision making in
GATT/WTO, 547–50, 564–7
Constitution. See United States
Constitutional Political Economy (journal),
424n59
constitutive rules, and sovereignty, 207–208,
209, 222
constraint-choice analysis: and demand for
regimes, 20–3, 38; and context and
functions of international regimes,
24–8
constructivism: and conventional or
modified views of regime concept, 6, 7;
and institution design, 414; and
rationalism, 226; and types of regimes,
591n13; and war crimes tribunals, 596
Consultative Group on International
Agriculture Research (CGIAR), 689,
698f, 706
contracts and contract theory: and
bargaining in GATT/WTO, 547–50;
and ceasefires, 516; commitments and
effective systems of, 301n17; and
constraint-choice analysis, 23; and
dynamic of uncertainty, 174n23; and
economic literature on duration, 376;
GATT/WTO decision making and
Pareto-improving, 552; and moral

717

institution of promising, 302n19; and
self-protection requirement, 303n20
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE)
agreement, 103
Convention on Biological Diversity. See UN
Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD)
Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES), 86–7, 88,
90
Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(1948), 444–53
Conybeare, John A. C., 25n17
cooperation: and cease-fire agreements,
511–19; distinction between regular
behavior patterns and, 298n11;
duration and renegotiation as issues in,
375–7; endogeneity and selection
problems in compliance and, 95–9; and
evaluation of enforcement needs,
99–109; future of compliance and,
109–11; and game theory analyses of
multi-party negotiations, 566; and
informal agreements, 330; and
managerial thesis on compliance, 93–5,
104, 105, 106, 110; and neorealism,
390n22; rarity of deep forms of,
101–105; and realism, 312n47; tacit
forms of, 296n12
Correlates of War (COW), 58, 262, 525,
526n18, 528
Costa v. Enel, 476
Costa Rica, and free trade agreements, 347t,
359t, 363t
Cote, Sean, 91n67
courts and tribunals: delegation of authority
to, 131–2; growth of numbers in late
20th century, 130; and operating
system, 429. See also dispute
resolution; European Court of Human
Rights; European Court of Justice;
International Court of Justice;
International Criminal Court; war
crimes tribunals
COW. See Correlates of War; crude oil
washing
Cox proportional hazard, and monetary
policy, 580
Crawford, Beverly, 598n17
Crawford, James, 216

718

Index

credit markets, history of development of,
27n21
criminal organizations, and informal
agreements, 305n27
Croatia, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 272t, 279, 285
cross-national variation, in views on human
rights, 637–40
crude oil washing (COW), 663, 665, 666,
667–8, 680
Cuba: and Cuban missile crisis, 80, 318–19;
and Rio Pact, 59
culture. See organizational culture
Curtin, Deirdre, 471n48
custom: and law, 191–2; and regime
development, 15–16
customs unions, and market integration,
361, 363
CW. See chemical warfare
Cyert, Richard, 21n8
Cyprus: and ceasefire, 528n24; and free
trade agreements, 347t; and interstate
territorial aggressions, 272t; and
peacekeeping, 537
Czech Republic: and free trade agreements,
346t, 347t, 349t, 351t, 358t, 362t,
364t, 366t; secession of Slovakia from,
276n37
Dahl, Robert A., 428
Dam, Kenneth W., 341n24, 572n11
David, Arie E., 303n23
David, Stephen, 650
Davis, Lance E., 21n7, 24n15
Dayton peace treaty (1995), 266
death penalty, and war crimes tribunals, 605
deception, and demand for specific
information, 37
decision making: and bargaining in
GATT/WTO, 541–3; and definition of
‘‘regime,’’ 3, 4–6, 10; and European
Court of Human Rights, 640–1; and
structural realism, 544–5; types of rules
for non-judicial action, 543
decolonization: and bills of rights and
constitutional review in former British
colonies, 648n70; and sovereignty of
African states, 209–12. See also
colonialism
deep cooperation, and arms control,
101–105

defenses, and causes of noncompliance, 77
Defrenne No. 1 (1971) and Defrenne No. 2
(1976), 501
De Gaulle, Charles, 465
delegation: of authority to courts and
tribunals, 131–2; and defining
characteristics of law, 192–3; and
dimensions of legalization, 115, 127–9
demand, for international regimes, 20–3,
29–39
demilitarized zones (DMZs), 532t, 533
democracy: and alliance behavior, 56–63;
and commitments, 45, 46–56, 63–4;
definition of, 45–6, 63; and human
rights, 632–6; and international
monetary obligations, 588, 590; and
peace, 528n24, 632–6, 637n43; and
territorial integrity norm, 281, 282,
283, 288
Demsetz, Harold, 685, 688
Denmark, and boundaries after World War I,
282
Des Forges, Alison, 602n34
detention, of oil tankers violating discharge
standards, 677
determinacy, and trade liberalization, 187
deterrence: and cease-fire agreements, 519;
and oil pollution control agreements,
680; and trade agreements, 181; and
war crimes tribunals, 609, 610. See also
enforcement
Deutsch, Karl, 9
developing countries: and bioprospecting,
694–5; juridical statehood and relations
with developed countries, 226; and
territorial integrity norm, 284; trade
agreements and differential treatment
of, 555n45. See also less developed
countries
Diamond v. Chakrabarty (1980), 693
Dicker, Richard, 615
Diehl, Paul, 262, 437n21, 537n36
Diggs v. Schultz (1972), 76n28
Dillenkofer case (1994), 508, 509
discharge subregime, and oil pollution,
659–61
dispute resolution: and delegation as
dimension of legalization, 127–9;
GATT/WTO procedures of, 134, 137,
139, 144, 151–3, 176, 180–5; interstate
and transnational forms of, 130–1, 132,

Index
140–53; legalism and trade issues in,
333–72; and politics of litigation and
compliance, 144–9; and trade
liberalization, 180–5; typology of,
132–42
distributive effect, and trade agreements,
181, 564–5
Dixon, William, 48n16, 52n36
Dobrynin, Anatoly, 319
Doha Round, of GATT/WTO, 565, 567
Donnelly, Jack, 626–7
double hulls, and oil tankers, 662
double jeopardy, and war crimes tribunals,
605
Dowell, William, 611
Downs, George W., 116n1, 174–5, 297n10,
315n54, 323, 377n5, 401
Doyle, Michael, 56, 58, 64, 281n47, 629
Drzemczewski, Andrew Z., 624n7
Dunn, Lewis A., 398, 399
durability, of norms, 237–8
duration: of alliances, 61–3; and
compromise, 396–8; in political science
literature on international relations,
375–7; and uncertainty in renegotiation
of treaties, 380, 392–6. See also
flexibility
East African Community (EAC), 347t, 354t,
356, 358t, 363t, 364t, 366t, 368t
Eastern Europe: pact between Stalin and
Hitler on division of, 306n29; Soviet
Union and territorial boundaries after
World War II, 264–5, 267, 280n44,
282–3;
Easton, Carol, 327n78
East Timor: absorption of by Indonesia,
285n59; and territorial boundaries,
279; and war crimes tribunals, 612–13
ECHR. See European Court of Human
Rights
ECJ. See European Court of Justice
econometric model, for cease-fire
agreements, 525–42
economic(s): and bargaining power in treaty
negotiations, 381–2; and contract
duration, 376; dispute settlement and
relative power in, 341, 342–3; and
incentives to adopt oil pollution control
measures, 668, 669; and territorial
revisionism, 285–6, 287; and theories of

719

market failure, 26–7. See also
asymmetry; microeconomic theory;
monetary system power; New
International Economic Order
Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), 348t, 354t, 356,
359t, 363t, 364t, 365–7 366t, 367,
368t, 369
economic unions, and market integration,
361
ecosystem concept, and biodiversity, 695n27
Ecuador: and free trade agreements, 346t,
358t, 363t; and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 283. See also
Andean Pact
Edwards, David, 574n24–5
EEA. See European Economic Area
effectiveness, of institutions, 418–19
efficiency: and compliance, 68–9; in marketfailure literature, 28
EFTA. See European Free Trade Association
egoistic self-interest, and regime
development, 10–11
Egypt, and interstate territorial aggressions,
271t, 273t
Ehrenberg, Richard, 27n21
elemental regimes, and plant genetic
resources, 686
Ellickson, Robert, 75
Elliott, Kimberly, 104, 107
El Salvador, and war with Honduras,
522n10
Elster, Jon, 75, 298n11, 322n73
embeddedness: and control of dispute
resolution, 140–2, 143; as dimension of
delegation, 131–2; interstate and
transnational politics of, 147–9
emergence stage, of norm development, 278
Emmons, Juliann, 57, 63, 64
empowerment, and European Court of
Justice, 474–5
enforcement: endogeneity and selection
problems in compliance and, 95–9;
evaluation of amount necessary,
99–109; and future of cooperation,
109–11; and structures of GATT/WTO,
174–5, 176. See also deterrence;
sanctions
entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship, and
transaction costs of international
regimes, 32

720

Index

environmental issues and environmentalism:
crafting and recrafting of international
treaties and, 682–3; and enforcement of
agreements, 107–108; and political
shocks, 437n21. See Law of the Sea; oil
pollution
equipment subregime, and oil pollution,
661–3, 672–3, 676–7, 680, 681
Eritrea, and interstate territorial aggressions,
272t, 276n37
escape clauses, in trade agreements, 175,
176–9
Estonia, and free trade agreements, 348t,
349t, 353t, 362t, 367t
Esty, Daniel C., 554n42
Ethiopia, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 272t, 276n37, 279
ethnicity: ‘‘ethnic cleansing’’ and war crimes
tribunals, 599, 607; instrumentalism
and violence based on, 619; and
peacekeepers, 613n107; and protection
from territorial aggrandizement, 287
Europe. See Eastern Europe; European
Community; European integration;
specific countries
European Community (EC): and conflicts
with U.S. on competition policy and
antitrust, 313n49; dispute resolution
and legal system of, 143; European
Court of Justice and coalitions in,
493–7; and forms of legalization, 118;
and free trade agreements, 347–8t,
352t, 354t, 358t, 355n33, 359t, 362t,
363t, 364t, 366t, 368t; and territorial
boundaries, 267; use of term, 544n3.
See also Eastern Europe; European
integration; General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT); specific
countries; World Trade Organization
(WTO)
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR):
and independence of adjudication,
135–6; negotiating history of, 636–46,
647–9; purpose and effectiveness of,
623–4; realism and idealism in, 652;
and sovereignty, 230–1; and
transnational dispute resolution,
143, 152
European Court of Justice (ECJ): and
community law, 459n5; and game
theoretic analysis, 487–93; and

individual access, 138–9; International
Court of Justice compared to, 155–6;
and legal autonomy, 486–7, 505; and
neofunctionalism, 460–85; and politics,
487, 487–97, 510; role of in European
integration, 457–8; strategic history of
case law in, 497–510; and transnational
dispute resolution, 141, 147, 152
European Economic Area (EEA), 348t, 351t,
355n33, 359t, 362t, 364t, 365, 366t,
368t
European Free Trade Association (EFTA),
141–2, 348–9t, 350, 351t, 352t, 354t,
355n33, 356, 358t, 359t, 360, 362–4t,
366t, 367t, 368t, 371
European Human Rights Convention, 152
European integration: and depth of
cooperation, 104–105; importance of,
457; role of European Court of Justice
in, 453–4. See also European
Community
Everling, Ulrich, 474n63, 481–2
evolutionary explanation, of institutions,
414–15
ex ante rules: and implementation of regime
complexes, 687, 705, 707; and
renegotiation of treaties, 383n12
exceptions, and trade legalization, 176–9
exchange rates: and legalization, 572–3; and
monetary unions, 463n17
exit tactics, in GATT/WTO bargaining, 552
expected utility, and renegotiation of
agreements, 389n21
expected value, of reciprocal trade pacts, 340
exports, and mobilization in trade
negotiations, 168–72. See also imports
extradition, and informal agreements,
321n66
Exxon Valdez (ship), 652
Factortame No. 3 case (1994), 508, 509
Falklands War, 530
FAO. See UN Food and Agriculture
Organization
‘‘farmers’ rights,’’ and intellectual property
law, 692n18, 707
Farrell, Henry, 288
Fearon, James, 55, 381n10, 401, 519n8
federalism, and European Court of Justice,
472
Fellner, William, 23

Index
Field, Alexander J., 21n6
financial resources, and judicial
independence, 137
Financial Times, 313n49
Finnemore, Martha, 194n19, 259n2, 266,
651n82
Fisher, Roger, 586n51
fishing rights, and enforcement of
environmental regimes, 107–108
Fisscher case (1994), 502–503
flag states, and shipping industry, 675, 677,
680
flexibility: of informal agreements, 315; and
learning model, 375–88
Flynn, Gregory, 288
Food and Agriculture Organization. See UN
Food and Agriculture Organization
foreign policy, stability of in liberal
democratic states, 48–51
Fortna, Virginia Page, 522n24
forum shopping, and plant genetic resources,
686–7, 695–6, 703
Foxwell, John, 676
France: and boundaries after World War I,
282; and European Court of Justice
decisions on agricultural products,
498–500
Franck, Thomas M., 124, 187, 196, 628–9
Francovich ruling (1991), 504, 505–508
Frankfurter, Felix, 484n95
free riders, and transaction costs, 32
free trade. See liberalization; trade
free trade areas, and market integration,
361, 363
Fried, Charles, 302n19
Frieden, Jeffry A., 340n21
friendship, and definition of ‘‘regime,’’ 4
Fuller, Lon L., 194n21
functionalism: and constraint-choice
analysis of international regimes, 25–8;
and impact of transnationalism on
sovereignty, 9; and rational design
theory, 404, 416, 420
functional spillover, and logic of law, 463,
475–7
Gambia, and secession from Senegambia,
276n37
Gamble, John King, Jr., 126n18
game theory: and approaches to compliance,
67–8; and cooperation problems in

721

multi-party negotiations, 566; and
study of European Court of
Justice, 487–93. See also prisoners’
dilemma
Garrett, Geoffrey, 458n4
Garthoff, Raymond L., 309n37
GATT. See General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade
Gaubatz, Kurt Taylor, 376n3
gender. See sexes; women
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT): and ambiguity in compliance,
79; bargaining and outcomes in,
547–52; and deep cooperation,
105–107; and dispute resolution, 135,
138, 140, 144, 153–5, 173, 180–5,
186–7; and enforcement strategies, 99,
174–5; and export groups, 169; and
information, 165–6; and nesting of
agreements or arrangements, 26; and
organized hypocrisy of consensus
decision making, 546, 564–7; and
retaliation, 170–1; safeguards in,
316n56; and side-payments, 33n29;
and sovereign equality rules, 560–3; and
special and differential treatment for
less developed countries, 5; and trade
rounds, 553–60. See also Tokyo Round;
Uruguay Round; World Trade
Organization
generalized commitment, norm of, 35, 38
genetic engineering, and plant resources,
693. See also plant genetic resources
Geneva Conference for the Supervision of
the International Trade in Arms and
Ammunition (Geneva Protocol, 1925),
244, 245, 255
Geneva Convention (1949), 600, 603
genocide: and Cambodia, 449n45, 451,
611–12; and operating and normative
systems of international law, 443–53; in
Rwanda, 602–606. See also war crimes
tribunals
George, Alexander, 294n3
George, Lloyd, 328n80
George, Stephen, 463n17
Georgia, and territorial boundaries, 277
Geradin, Damien, 554n42
Germany: and border with Poland, 265n22;
and submarine warfare during World
War II, 248–52

722

Index

Ghana: and sovereignty, 208; and interstate
territorial aggressions, 273t
Gilpin, Robert, 223n62, 286, 559n54
Giscard d’Estaing, Vale´ry, 500
Gleditsch, Kristian S., 268n36
Glennon, Michael J., 87n58
Goa, invasion of by India, 283
Goertz, Gary, 262, 437n21
Goldblat, Jozef, 103
Gold Coast, and sovereignty in African
context, 208
Goldsmith, J. L., 190n9
gold standard, and monetary system,
569–72, 590–1
Goldstein, Judith, 198–9, 200
Goldwyn, Samuel, 293
Golley, Frank, 695n27
Gooch, G. P., 320n63
Gormley, L., 472n50
Gowa, Joanne, 294n2
Graham, Thomas, 391
Greece, boundaries of after World War I, 282
Greene, William H., 525n16
Green Room caucuses, and GATT/WTO,
555
Grenada, U.S. intervention in, 228n78
Grey, Sir Edward, 320n63
Grieco, Joseph M., 312n47, 376n1, 390n22,
401n49
‘‘grim strategy,’’ of enforcement, 97
Grossman, Gene, 97n13
Grotius, Hugo, 6–7, 9, 10, 17, 219, 223, 224,
595
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), 349t,
352t, 359t, 363t, 366t, 368t
Gulf War, 539
gunboat diplomacy, and realism in
international theory, 228
Guyana, and monetary system, 578–9
Haas, Ernst B., 3, 10, 16, 457n1, 459, 465–6,
472, 479, 483
Habermas, Jurgen, 422–3
Habyarimana, Juve´nal, 602
Hague Commission of Jurists (1923), 243
Hague Peace Conference of 1899, 242, 244
‘‘hard law’’: and consensus decision-making
in GATT/WTO, 544; and dimensions of
legalization, 115; and institutionalism,
591; and war crimes tribunals, 597, 602
Harrison, Reginald, 462n12

Harsanyi, John, 22n10
Hart, H. L. A., 188
Hart, Keith, 214n27
Hart, Michael, 430–1, 433
Hart, Oliver, 379n8
Hart, Robert A., 370n45
Hartz, Lewis, 49n22
Hasenclever, Andreas, 596n11
Hawkins, Keith, 679n63
Hayek, Friedrich, 414, 415
hazard ratios, and econometric model of
ceasefires, 528
Heaver, Trevor D., 667n39
Hegel, G. F. W., 206
hegemonic stability, theory of, 19, 38,
439–40
hegemony, theory of leadership and views of
power, 12–13
Heiner, Ronald, 410
Helpman, Elhanan, 97n13
Helsinki Final Act (1975), 117, 123, 279,
326
Henkin, Louis, 31n25, 66–7, 314n52,
412n52, 623n2
Hensel, Paul R., 537n36
Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HH),
357
hidden agreements, and security issues,
318–21
Hillgenberg, H., 194n19
Hirsch, Fred, 4, 14, 30n23
Hirschman, Albert O., 14n20, 14n22
Hitler, Adolf, 306n29
Hobbes, Thomas, 224
Hochschild, Jennifer, 46n11
Hoffman, Stanley, 230n85
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 79
Holocaust, 452, 589
Holsti, Kalevi, 262, 267
Holsti, Ole, 57
Holstrom, Albert O., 379n8
Holy Alliance, 650
Honduras: and interstate territorial
aggressions 273t; and war with El
Salvador, 522n10
Hopmann, Terrence, 57
House, Edward M., 329n83
Howard, Michael, 280
Hudec, Robert E., 71n12, 107, 154n40, 155,
182, 183, 341n24
Hull, David W., 355n33

Index
human resources, and judicial independence,
137
human rights: and customary law
obligations, 191–2; and doctrine of
effectiveness, 150; growth in
articulation of, 616; and institutional
changes in operating system, 448; and
issues of access in enforcement systems,
139–40; and juridical statehood in
Africa, 228–9; and liberalism, 632–6;
origin and evolution of regimes on,
646–9; and theories of international
cooperation, 622–3, 626–31. See also
and European Court of Human Rights;
war crimes tribunals
Human Rights Watch, 615, 616
Hungary, and free trade agreements, 346t,
348t, 349t, 351t, 358t, 362t, 363t,
364t, 366t
Hun Sen, 612
Hussein, Saddam, 307n30
Huth, Paul K., 262, 283n55
Hutton, Nicholas, 33n29
idealism, and views on human rights, 624,
629–31, 651–2
idealpolitik, and war crimes tribunals, 595,
596, 618
ideational theory. See idealism
ideal type, of legalization, 115
ideology, and appeal of human rights, 627–9
implementation: and control of dispute
resolution, 140–2; and regimes on plant
genetic resources, 687, 705–708
imports: and bans on agricultural products,
498–500; tariffs and increases in,
177n30. See also exports
in absentia trials, and war crimes tribunals,
601
incentives, and cease-fire agreements, 520
incremental expansion, and integration
process, 463–4
independence: and control of adjudication,
133–6; as dimension of delegation,
131–2; interstate and transnational
politics of judicial, 143, 144. See also
decolonization; sovereignty
India: and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t, 274t, 275t, 283, 528n24,
530n29; and peace settlements, 538–9,
541n45

723

individuals: and access to dispute
resolution, 138–40; and petitions to
European Court of Human Rights,
637; and responsibility for genocide,
451–2
Indonesia: and interstate territorial
aggressions, 274t, 275t, 279, 285n59;
and war crimes tribunals, 612–13
influence, and compliance with oil pollution
control treaties, 671–80
informal agreements: and cooperation, 330;
and hidden agreements, 318–21;
rationales for, 312–18; role of in
international relations, 293–300; and
self-help, 300–306; and tacit
agreements, 321–5; and treaties,
306–12, 325–9. See also agreements;
treaties
information: compliance and systems of,
651–2, 665–6, 675; and demand for
international regimes, 29, 31, 35–7, 38;
and mobilization, 161–3
inspections, of oil tankers for pollution
control violations, 678–9
institution(s): definition of, 191; and
definition of ‘‘regime,’’ 3; and design of
European Court of Human Rights, 631;
explaining interplay of, 685; and
Genocide Convention, 447–50; and oil
pollution control regime, 678; and
Rational Design project, 406–25; and
resources for democratic commitments,
53–6; stability of democratic, 51; and
treaty enforcement, 98–9
institutionalism: and theories of compliance,
656–7; and war crimes tribunals, 596–7
institutionalization stage, of norm
development, 278, 279
institutional momentum, and war crimes
tribunals, 607–608
instrumentalism, and ethnic or religious
wars, 619
instrumental rationality, and normative
desirability, 422–3
instrumental rules, and sovereignty, 208
integration: neofunctionalism and theory of
political, 461–2; proposed depth of in
trade pacts, 357–72. See also European
integration
intellectual property (IP), and plant
genetic resources, 685–708. See also

724

Index

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property (TRIPs)
intentionality, and Rational Design
framework, 414–16
intentions, norms and signaling of, 257
Inter-American Commission, 137
Inter-American Convention on Human
Rights, 616
interest groups, and GATT/WTO
negotiations, 164n9, 168
‘‘intergenerational equality,’’ in international
environmental law, 194n19
Intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF),
103
Internal Revenue Code (U.S.), 78
international aid, and sovereignty, 230
International Atomic Energy Association
(IAEA), 392, 399
International Civil Aeronautics
Organization, 74
International Coffee Agreement, 402
International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution of the Seas by Oil
(OILPOL), 659, 675
International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL),
108–109, 659–61, 663, 671–3, 675,
677, 678, 680, 681
International Convention for the Protection
of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), 689,
694, 698f
International Court of Justice (ICJ), 145,
147, 150, 155–6, 279, 329
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 117–18, 189n15
international Criminal Court (ICC), 450,
594, 613–15
International Criminal Tribunal for
Yugoslavia (ICTY), 598–602,
607–10
International Federation for European Law,
467
International Labor Organization (ILO), 81,
83–4
International Maritime Organization
(IMO), 89, 108–109, 659
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 74,
119–21, 343n32, 360, 569, 572–84,
593n59
International Oil Pollution Prevention
(IOPP) certificate, 109, 671, 674

international relations. See compliance;
cooperation; law; legalization; politics;
regime(s); sovereignty; trade; treaties
International Standards Organization, 432
International Trade Organization (ITO),
71n12
International Treaty on Plant Genetic
Resources (2002), 689, 699
International Undertaking on Plant Genetic
Resources (1983), 689
International Whaling commission, 89
interstate dispute resolution: and access
issues, 142–9; definition and
characteristics of, 130–1, 132, 140–2;
and dynamics of legalization, 149–55
interstitial law, and normative system, 188
invisible hand functionalism, and Rational
Design theory, 416
invisible weighting, and bargaining at
GATT/WTO, 550–3, 567
involuntary defection, and ceasefires, 522,
535
Iran: and interstate territorial aggressions,
275t, 305n30; and Islamic view of
international relations, 6n7; and war
with Iraq, 307n30, 539
Iraq: and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t, 275t, 279, 305n30; and war with
Iran, 307n30, 539
irresponsibility, and demand for specific
information, 37
isolationism, of democratic states, 52
Israel: and free trade agreements, 348t, 349t,
350t, 352t, 353t, 355, 359t, 362t, 364–
5t, 366t; and informal accords with
U.S., 295n7; and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 283. See also ArabIsraeli war
issue density, and demand for international
regimes, 32–3, 34, 38
Italy: boundaries of after World War I, 282;
and state responsibility for violation of
EU law, 505, 506
Jackman, Henry, 405
Jackson, Robert H., 341n24
Jacob-Foltzer, Vale´rie, 624n7
Jacobs, Francis, 466n31
James, Alan, 205n1, 207, 216n37
Japan: and oil pollution, 670; and retaliatory
tariffs, 171

Index
Jenson, Lloyd, 393, 394
Jervis, Robert, 4, 522n9
Johnston, Alastair Iain, 239n13
joint commissions, and peacekeeping, 537–8
Joll, James, 329n82
Jones, Bryan D., 437n21
Jones, E. L., 222n55
Jordan, Hamilton, 314n51
juridical statehood: and sovereignty in
Africa, 215–18, 223–31; territorial
integrity norm and self-determination
of, 284
jurisdiction: and Genocide Convention,
445–7; and operating system of
international law, 429
Jus belli, and warfare, 595, 609
jus cogens, and preemptory norms, 116n2,
191
jus gentium, and international dualism, 219,
221
Kahler, Miles, 191n14, 199, 363
Kandori, Michihiro, 99n15
Kant, Immanuel, 47–8, 53, 56, 64, 223,
224–5, 229, 230–1
Kaplan, Morton, 4
Kaplan-Meier estimates: for duration of
alliances, 61–2; and International
Monetary Fund membership, 580
Karadzic, Radovan, 608n63
Kashmir, and peacekeepers, 537
Kaufman, Robert, 641n49
Kaufmann, Chaim, 619n107
Kazakhstan, and CIS Economic Court,
356n36
Keal, Paul, 294
Keck, Margaret, 630, 642
Kegley, Charles, 60n51
Keifer, Nicholas, 60n52
Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928), 258, 264, 278
Kennedy, John F., 80, 201, 319
Kennedy, Robert, 80, 319
Kenya, and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t
Keohane, Robert O., 3, 4, 10, 12, 77n30,
191n14, 223n62, 236, 402, 439, 620,
630, 681n65
Khmer Rouge (Cambodia), 611
Khouri, Fred J., 538n38
Khrushchev, Nikita, 319
Kier, Elizabeth, 239n13

725

Kingsbury, Benedict, 190n9
Kinsolving, Lucien Lee, 538n38
Kirby, J. H., 661
Kirk-Greene, A. H. M., 211
kleptocracy, and African systems of
government, 213
Klingberg, Frank, 49n22
Knight, Frank, 409
knowledge, and regime development,
16–17. See also information
Koh, Harold, 190n9
Koremenos, Barbara, 377n5, 403, 412, 415,
597n16
Korman, Sharon, 261, 265n22–23
Kornhauser, Lewis, 303n21, 304n23
Kosovo, and war crimes tribunals, 607–10
Kovenock, Dan, 339n18
Krasner, Stephen D., 82n44, 125n16,
401n49, 402, 559n54, 564n72, 596n11
Kratochwil, Friedrich, 75, 236
Kreps, David M., 307n32
Kronman, Anthony, 303n20
Kudrle, Robert T., 37n41
Kupchan, Charles & Clifford, 628
Kuwait, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 279, 285
Kydland, Finn E., 377n5
Laitin, David, 14n20
Lake, David A., 619n109
land, territorial revisionism and value of,
286
language, and degrees of specificity in
treaties, 78–9
Lasswell, Harold D., 194n20
Latsis, Spiro J., 21n5
Latvia, and free trade agreements, 348t,
349t, 353t, 362t, 367t
Lauterpacht, Hersch, 224, 261n9, 322n69
law: concept of legalization and views of,
116; and contracting for consensus at
GATT/WTO, 547–50; and custom,
191–2; defining characteristics of,
192–5; exercise of governmental power
as subject to, 76; importance of,
197–201; need for richer view of
international, 189–90; and
neofunctionalism, 459–60; as process,
195–6; role of in liberal democracy, 52;
separation of from politics, 479–84;
subjects and actors in, 447–9; treaties

726

Index

and international, 75; treaty
enforcement strategies and domestic,
99. See also courts and tribunals;
legalization; normative system;
operating system
Law of the Sea (1970s), 34n32, 71, 72
leadership: stability of democratic, 50–1;
theory of hegemonic, 13
leading states, and operating system, 439–42
League of Nations, 221, 245, 258, 263, 278,
284, 329
learning model, of agreement flexibility,
390–400
LeBlanc, Lawrence J., 447n42
Leebron, David W., 685n5
Leeds, Brett Ashley, 516n2
legal autonomy, and European Court of
Justice, 486–7, 505
legal bureaucratization, and definition of
legalization, 189
legal discretion, and judicial independence,
136
legal inconsistencies, and plant genetic
resources, 687, 703–705
legalism, and settlement of trade disputes,
333–72
legalization: continuum of, 129–30; courts
and tribunals as key element of, 130;
definition of, 115, 189; dichotomy
between world politics and, 129;
dimensions of, 122–9; information and
mobilization of domestic trade groups,
159–72; and international monetary
system, 593; interstate and
transnational dynamics of, 149–55; of
property rights, 696–9; relationship
between trade and, 185–7; variability
of, 116–21. See also law; treaties
legal politics game, and European Court of
Justice, 485–8
legal precedent, and European Court of
Justice, 494–5
legitimacy, interrelated sources of in law,
194–5
Legro, Jeffrey W., 246n30, 250n32,
630n27–8
Lenaerts, Koenrad, 474
less developed countries (LDCs), GATT and
special or differential treatment for, 5,
549n45. See also developing countries
Lester, Anthony, 648n69

Levy, Jack S., 46n12
Lewis, David K., 35n34
Libecap, Gary D., 697, 699n38
liberalism: and concept of liberal democracy,
46; and human rights, 629–36, 649–50;
and territorial integrity norm, 281
liberalization, dispute settlement preferences
and proposed depth of, 341–2. See also
trade
Libya, and interstate territorial aggressions,
228n78, 273t, 272t
Lieberman, Peter, 286
Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963), 313n48
Lindblom, Charles, 88
linkages, and enforcement schemes, 98
Lippmann, Walter, 54
Lipson, Charles, 308n35, 403, 412, 415
Lithuania, and free trade agreements, 348t,
349t, 353t, 362t, 367t
litigation, and politics of dispute resolution,
144–9
Lloyd, David, 281
load-on-top procedure (LOT), and marine
oil pollution, 666–7
logistical regression (logit), and compliance,
588
London Dumping Convention (1972), 661
London Protocol on Submarine Warfare
(1936), 242
Long, Andrew G., 516n2
Lutz, Ellen, 195n25, 200–201
Lyster, Simon, 695n27
Maastricht Intergovernmental Conference
(1992), 457, 502, 504, 544n3
MacFarlane, Neil, 277
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 43–4, 47, 49, 52, 54,
67, 223
Macmillan, Harold, 210
macrocorrelation, norms and organizational
culture during World War II, 241–8,
249t
macroeconomic policy, and fixing of
exchange rates, 463n17
Maggi, Giovanni, 339n18
majoritarian decisions, and decision-making
rules, 543, 544
Malaysia, and territorial boundaries, 274t,
276n37, 285
Mali, and interstate territorial aggressions,
272t

Index
Malta, and free trade agreements, 348t
managerial thesis, on compliance and
cooperation, 93–5, 104, 105, 106–107,
110
Mancini, G. Federico, 471n49, 476, 484
‘‘manifest and grave’’ violations proviso, of
European Court of Justice, 509
Mano River Union, 349t, 351t, 358t, 362t,
364t, 366t
Manson, Janet M., 242n17
Marbury v. Madison, 499–500
March, James, 21n8
Marine Mammal Protection Act, 89
market(s): image of in structuralist views of
regime, 7; relative size of and bargaining
power at GATT/WTO, 550–1
market failure, economic theories of, 26–7,
28, 37
Marleasing case (1990), 505
MARPOL. See International Convention for
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
Martin, Lisa, 198–9, 200
Marxism, and structuralist views of
international relations, 8n11, 8n13
Mastanduno, Michael, 320n64
Mattli, Walter, 415–16
Mauritania, and territorial revisionism,
285n59
Maxwell-Fyfe, Sir David, 643
Mayer, Peter, 596n11
Mazrui, Ali, 229n81
McDougal, Myres S., 194n20
McIntyre, Elizabeth, 545n13
McKeown, Timothy J., 19n2
McNeil, Hector, 644
Mearsheimer, John J., 516n2
measurement: of norms, 241–5; of
organizational cultures, 245–7
mediation: and legalization, 127, 129; and
peace mechanisms, 535, 542. See also
third parties
medieval world: and bills of exchange, 14;
and international boundaries, 260
Mediterranean Plan, 108
Melman, Yossi, 297n7
MERCOSUR. See Common Market of the
South
Meron, Theodor, 601, 618
Merrills, J. G., 624n7
Mexico, and free trade agreements, 346t,
352t, 355, 359t, 362t, 363t, 364t, 366t.

727

See also North American Free Trade
Agreement
M’Gonigle, R. Michael, 658n14, 663n29
microanalysis, of norms and organizational
culture in restrictions on warfare, 248–
54
microeconomic theory: and constraintchoice analysis, 21; and quality
uncertainty, 36
military: and organizational culture, 240;
and realist view of alliances, 312n47.
See also warfare
Millenium Round, of WTO talks, 168
Miller, Lynn, 222–3
Milner, Helen, 27n21, 377n5
Milosevic, Slobodan, 601, 609n68, 610
Mitchell, Sarah McLaughlin, 283n55,
411n27, 416, 516n2
Mitchell, Ronald B., 94, 108, 647n1
Mitrany, David, 465
Mladic, Ratko, 608
Mnookin, Robert H., 303n21, 304n25
mobilization: and antitrade groups, 163–8;
and export groups, 168–72; and trade
negotiations, 159–63
Moe, Terry, 633, 634
monetary system: and compliance decisions,
585–90; and domestic policy credibility,
650; IMF and ‘‘rules of good conduct,’’
572–5; and legal commitment, 576–84;
and side-payments in trade
agreements, 33n29; status of before
1945, 569–72
monitoring, of ceasefires, 521, 523
Monroe, Alan, 49n19
Montevideo Convention on Rights and
Duties of States (1933), 215
Montreal Protocol, 74n21, 82, 83, 86,
118–19, 679n63, 702
Moon, John Ellis van Courtland, 245n26
moral climate, of international relations,
261
moral hazard: and demand for specific
information, 37; and flexibility in trade
agreements, 174
morality, and Kantianism in international
relations, 230
Moravcsik, Andrew, 191n14, 340n23,
630n27–8, 632n30–1
Morgenthau, Hans J., 67n4, 208n10, 626,
656n6–7

728

Index

Morocco: and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 272t; and territorial
revisionism, 285n59
Morrow, James D., 401n49
Mortimer, Robert A., 226n74
Moss, James E., 664n30
Mozambique, and juridical statehood, 216
Nadelmann, Ethan, 287n64
NAFTA. See North American Free Trade
Agreement
Nagel, Ernest, 25n18
Namibia, and secession from South Africa,
276n37
Napoleonic Wars, and territorial
revisionism, 284
Nash equilibrium, 297–8
National Academy of Sciences, 664
national courts, and European Court of
Justice, 472–4
nationalism: and barriers to European
integration, 462–5; and international
boundaries, 261, 263
national preferences: formation of, 340; and
views on human rights, 637–40
necessity requirement, and operating
systems, 435–7, 446–7
Neff, Stephen C., 53n37
negotiation: and compromise, 396–8; and
duration of treaties, 380–1; and
European Court of Human Rights,
636–46; and informal agreements,
314–18; and political science literature
on international relations, 375–7; and
treaty making, 71–2; and uncertainty,
314–18, 392–6. See also flexibility
Neier, Aryeh, 616n98
neofunctionalism: and European Court of
Justice, 460–85; and political role of
law, 459–60
neorealism: and cooperation, 390n22; and
international theory, 223n62, 228
nesting, of agreements in international
regimes, 26
Netherlands: and European Court of Human
Rights, 648n69; and interstate
territorial aggressions, 274t
neutral observers, and ceasefires, 521
New International Economic Order, 694
New Zealand, and League mandates after
World War I, 282

Nicaragua, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t
Nin (magazine), 610
noise, and renegotiation of agreements, 377,
390
non bis in idem, and war crimes tribunals,
604
non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
and compliance levels, 90
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), 85–6,
313n48
norm(s): boundaries and development of,
266, 278–9; and compliance, 74–6;
definition of, 259n2; and definition of
‘‘regime,’’ 3, 4–6, 10; and
organizational culture, 239–40;
principles of and regime development,
13–15; problems with theoretical and
methodological orientations on, 236–8;
recent interest of international theorists
in, 233; and restrictions on warfare,
234, 240–58; and rise of property rights
in plant genetic resources, 688–99.
See also normative system; values
normative desirability, and institution
design, 421–3
normative persuasion, and human rights,
627–9
normative system, of international law: and
correlates of change, 431–9; definition
of, 426; explanation of concept, 432–4;
integration between operating system
and, 443–53
North, Douglass C., 21n7, 24n15, 55
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), 125–6, 175, 349t, 353t,
355–6, 359t, 362t, 364t, 366t, 650
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 78, 104, 267, 308–309n37,
608–609
North Korea, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t
North Sea Continental Shelf Cases (1969),
193n17
Norway, and human rights dialogue with
China, 192
nos bis in idem, principle of, 598
Ntaryamira, Cyprien, 602
nuclear industry, and arms control
agreements, 394
nuclear weapons. See arms control

Index
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT),
390–400
Nushi, Pajazit, 610
Nye, Joseph S., 3, 10, 400n45
Oakeshott, Michael, 209n15, 210, 224n64
obligation: and defining characteristics of
law, 193–4; and dimensions of
legalization, 115, 122–4; and use of
term bindingness, 172n20
obscurity, and informal agreements, 312–14
oil pollution, and compliance with treaties
for control of in shipping industry,
654–5, 658–83
Olson, Mancur, Jr., 19n3, 87, 655n4
O’Neal Taylor, Cherie, 369n44
operating system: and correlates of change,
435–43; definition of, 426; explanation
of concept, 428–32; integration
between normative system and, 443–53
Oppenheim, Lassa, 261
opportunism, and trade liberalization,
180–5
oral agreements, and form of informal
agreements, 296–7, 326
organic theories, and power-oriented
assumptions about regimes, 10
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 266,
276, 280
Organization of American States (OAS), 80,
211, 266, 276
Organization of East Caribbean States
(OECS), 350t, 353t, 358t, 366t
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), 316
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), 120, 135n9, 267
organization theory, and compliance, 69
organizational culture, and norms, 239–58
organized hypocrisy, in GATT/WTO
decision making, 546, 564–7
Osborne, Martin J., 384n14
Ostrom, Elinor, 75, 99n15
outcomes, versus predictions in study of
norms in organizational culture, 248
Owen, John, 281
Oye, Kenneth, 36n36, 402
Packenham, Robert, 25n18
pacta sunt servanda, definition of, 122, 172
Page, Benjamin, 49

729

Pakistan: and Bangladesh, 276n37; and
interstate territorial aggressions, 273t,
274t, 275t, 528n24, 530n29; and peace
agreements, 538–9, 541n45
Pareto-improving contracts, and trade
rounds of GATT/WTO, 545
Paris Peace Conference (1919), 244
Parks, W. Hays, 244n24
‘‘passive voice’’ violations, of oil pollution
control standards, 673
Pastori, Alejandro, 369n44
path dependency, and institution design, 417
patterned behavior: creation of regimes and
reinforcement of, 9; as distinct from
cooperation, 296n11; usage and
custom, 15–16
peace: assessment of maintenance
mechanisms, 515–16, 525–33; and
cooperation theory, 517–25; definition
of, 517; democratic theory of, 628n20,
632n32, 637n43; econometric model
of, 525–42; possibility of durable, 542.
See also ceasefires
peacekeepers, and ceasefires, 523, 533t,
534t, 535, 542, 619n107
people’s rights, and colonial selfdetermination, 231
performative model, of agency, 412–13
Perlez, Jane, 87n58
Permanent Court of Arbitration, 145, 150
Permanent Court of International Justice,
145
Peru, and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t, 283
Pescatore, Pierre, 475–6, 478–9, 481, 482
Pettit, Philip, 421
Pettman, Ralph, 229n81
physical constraints, and ceasefires, 521,
523
Pierson, Paul, 404n3, 417
plant genetic resources (PGR), and
development of regime complex,
685–708
Plant Patent Act (U.S., 1930), 692, 693
Plant Variety Protection Act (U.S., 1970),
692n21, 698f
Polakiewicz, Jo¨rg, 624n7
Poland: and free trade agreements, 347t,
349t, 351t, 363t, 366t; and national
boundaries, 265n22, 283
Polanyi, Kari, 30n23

730

Index

policy discretion, and legalism in trade pacts,
337–8, 340–4
political shocks, and operating system
change, 437–9, 446–7
political spillover, and European integration,
464, 477–8
politics: and cease-fire agreements, 523–4,
539–41; dichotomy between
legalization and world politics, 129–30;
and domestic influences on operating
system, 442–3; and European Court of
Justice, 487, 495–6, 510; foreign policy
and American electoral, 50; and
International Criminal Court, 613–15;
litigation and compliance as issues in
dispute resolution, 144–9; multiple
levels of democratic domestic, 53–4;
and plant genetic resources, 685–708;
power and regime development, 11–13;
separation of law from, 479–81;
transparency of democratic domestic,
54–6. See also integration; realpolitik;
state
pollution. See oil pollution
Popper, Karl, 209n16
Portugal, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 274t, 275t
positivism, and institution design, 422
Posner, Richard, 190n9, 303n20
postmodernism, and performative model of
agency, 412–13
Potato case (1979), 499
Powell, Colin, 615
power: balances of, 121; and bargaining at
GATT/WTO, 550–3, 556–60, 567; and
definition of ‘‘regime,’’ 4; dispute
settlement and relative economic, 339,
340–1; human rights and interstate,
626–7; politics and regime
development, 11–13. See also
economics; empowerment
‘‘precautionary principle,’’ in international
environmental law, 194n19
precision: and defining characteristics of law,
192–3; and dimensions of legalization,
115, 124–7; and mobilization, 160–1
predictions, versus outcomes in norms of
organizational culture, 248
preliminary rulings, of European Court of
Justice, 467, 489n5
Price, Richard, 411n28

primary rules: and compliance system,
657–8, 681; and normative system, 433
principles: and definition of ‘‘regime,’’ 3,
4–6, 10; norms and regime
development, 13–15
Prins, Brandon, 283n55
Pritchard, Sonia Zaide, 652n14
prisoners’ dilemma: and logic of
‘‘bindingness,’’ 173; and tariff levels, 97
procedures. See decision-making
product-limit estimates, of duration of
alliances, 61
property rights, and plant genetic resources,
696–9, 706
propriety, and realist view of juridical
statehood, 227
protectionism, and mobilization of antitrade
groups, 163–8
pseudo-states, realism and theory of, 226
public goods, and supply of international
regimes, 38
public justification, and European Court of
Human Rights, 641–6
public preferences: liberal democracies and
distinctive, 51–3; stability of, 48–50
Puchala, Donald J., 23, 212, 220n53
punishment strategy, and treaty
enforcement, 97–8
Putnam, Robert, 53–4
quality uncertainty, and asymmetric
information, 36
quasi-agreements, and constraint-choice
analysis, 23
quasi-states, and sovereignty in Africa, 211,
212–15, 226
Quester, George, 393–5
rain forest, and plant genetic resources, 695
Rasmussen, Hjalte, 471n46, 472n52, 474,
478, 480, 484
rational-choice theory, and formation and
maintenance of international regimes,
21–2
Rational Design project, and institutional
design, 403, 405, 406–25
rationalism, and juridical statehood, 223,
225–6, 232
Raustiala, Kal, 378n6
Raviv, Dan, 297n7
Raymond, Gregory, 60n51

Index
Reagan, Ronald, 295
realism: and alliances, 630n27; and
ceasefires, 516; and cooperation,
312n47; and creation of war crimes
tribunals, 596; and instrumental rules,
206n10; and juridical statehood, 223,
226–8, 232; and Marxist analysis of
international relations, 8n11, 8n13; and
regime development, 17; submarine
warfare and strategic, 250; and theories
of compliance, 657; and utopianism,
419–20; and views on human rights,
624, 626–30, 625t, 651–2
realpolitik, and war crimes tribunals, 595,
596, 598, 618
reciprocity: and cease-fire agreements, 519;
and European integration, 474–5
recognition, and sovereignty in African
context, 218
reconciliation, and war crimes tribunals,
605–606, 619
red-world political-economic systems,
30n23
regime(s): causal relationships assumed in
analysis of, 6–10; compliance and
design of, 681–3; constraint-choice
analysis of context and functions of
international, 24–8; constraint-choice
analysis of demand for, 20–3: definition
of, 3–6, 82n44, 124n16; explanations
for development of, 10–17; and human
rights, 640–3; normative system and
theory of, 434; operating system and
theory of, 429–30; sovereignty and civil,
205–208, 218–23; theory of demand for
international, 29–39; types of, 597n13;
use of term, 205n7. See also civil
regimes; regime complexes;
subregimes; trade
regime complexes, and plant genetic
resources, 686, 699–708
regional behavior, and international
monetary system, 583, 588, 592
Reifschneider, Jennifer, 537n36
Reinhardt, Eric, 184
Reiss, Albert J., Jr., 679n63
Reiter, Dan, 519n7
religion: and Islamic view of international
relations, 6n7; and warfare, 619
renegotiation. See negotiation(s)
reporting requirements, of treaties, 86–7

731

republican liberalism. See liberalism
reputation: and compliance decisions in
international monetary system, 587;
and informal agreements, 307–309,
310n41, 311n45, 325–6
retaliation, and trade agreements, 170–1,
178–9
Reuter, Peter, 305n27
review, by third party in dispute resolution,
336
revisionism, and territorial aggression, 280,
281–2, 283–4, 288
revolutionism, and juridical statehood in
Africa, 223, 228–31, 232
Rhodesia, and juridical statehood, 216
Riker, William, 46n11, 51, 63
Rio Conference on Environment and
Development (1992), 120
Rio Pact, 59
risk, and uncertainty in institution design,
409–10
Risse, Thomas, 422–3, 628, 629n25
Rocke, David M., 116n1, 174–5, 297n10,
315n54, 323, 377n5, 401
Romania: and free trade agreements, 348t,
349t, 351t, 358t, 362t, 363t, 364t,
366t; and Triple Entente, 282n52
Rome, Treaty of (1958), 457, 467, 469,
475–6, 484, 489n5, 498, 500–501,
504, 614, 615
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 244
Rosendorff, B. Peter, 377n5
Rubin, James P., 127n21
Rubin, Paul, 309n38
Rubinstein, Ariel, 384n14
Ruggie, John, 5, 9, 627
rules: and definition of ‘‘regime,’’ 3, 4–6, 10;
general standards versus precise forms
of, 124; ‘‘of good conduct’’ in monetary
system, 572–5; and trade negotiations,
169–82. See also decision making; ex
ante rules; primary rules; secondary
rules; selection rules
Russett, Bruce, 281n48, 628n20
Rwanda, and genocide, 445, 448–9, 452,
602–606
Ryle, Gilbert, 206
SACU. See Southern African Customs Union
safeguard provisions, in trade agreements,
175, 178, 179

732

Index

Salisbury, Lord, 47, 60, 64
SALT. See Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Samuelson, Paul A., 34
sanctions: economic impact of, 335n9; and
oil pollution control treaties, 675–8
Sargent, Thomas, 55
‘‘satisficing’’ model, of bounded rationality,
69
Schachter, Oscar, 326n76
Schattschneider, E. E., 162
Schauer, Frederick, 75, 124n13
Scheffer, David, 615
Scheingold, Stuart, 458n3
Schelling, Thomas C., 35n33, 55, 68, 87n61
Schermers, Henry, 468, 556n46
Schumpeter, Joseph, 30n23
secondary rules, and operating system, 430
second best, theory of, 421
secrecy, and treaties, 327–8
segregated ballast tanks (SBT), 108–109,
662–3, 665, 666, 668, 669–70, 680
selection rules, and dispute resolution, 135,
136f
self-determination: and colonialism,
218n44, 231; and territorial integrity
norm, 282
self-help, and informal agreements, 300–306
self-interest: and European Court of Justice,
468–75; and neofunctionalism, 463
self-selection, and market failure, 37
sexes, European Court of Justice on equal
treatment of, 500–504
Shanks, Cheryl, 699n39
Shapiro, Robert, 49n19, 472–3, 479, 484–5
Shaw, Malcolm N., 216n35
Sheep Meat case (1979), 499–500
Shell Marine International, 660
Sherman Antitrust Act (U.S.), 118, 125
shipping industry, and agreements on
prevention of pollution, 108–109,
658–83
Shubik, Martin, 21n5
side payments: international regimes and
facilitation of, 33–4; and mobilization
of antitrade groups, 167
signaling, and cease-fire agreements,
521–2
Sikkink, Kathryn, 195n25, 200–201, 259n2,
440, 628, 630, 637n42, 642, 651n82
Simmons, Beth, 197, 593n61
Simon, Herbert, 21n8, 33n27, 36

Singapore: economic development and
control of territory, 286; and secession
from Malaysia, 276n37
Siverson, Randolph, 57, 63, 64
Slaughter, Anne-Marie, 191n14, 427
Slovakia: and free trade agreements, 346t,
348t, 349t, 351t, 358t, 362t, 363t,
364t, 366t; and secession from
Czechoslovakia, 276n37
Slovenia: and free trade agreements, 346t,
349t, 353t, 358t, 362t, 366t, 367t; and
interstate territorial aggressions, 272t
Smith, Adam, 11, 12n17
Smith, James McCall, 355n35, 360n40
Smith, Roger K., 394
Snidal, Duncan, 121, 126, 136, 194n19,
195n25, 403, 409, 412, 415, 569, 570,
597n14, 614
social change, and noncompliance, 106
social contract, and European Court of
Justice, 470
social distance, and war crimes tribunals,
606
social groups: and behavior of states,
632n30, 632n32; and openness in trade
negotiations, 164n9; and state
commitments to domestic audiences,
55; and variations in political
representation, 133n7
‘‘soft law’’: and consensus decision-making
in GATT/WTO, 544; and dimensions of
legalization, 115; as fluid concept,
194n19 ; and institutionalism, 591; and
war crimes tribunals, 597, 602
Somalia, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 272t, 279
South Africa, and secession of Namibia,
276n37
Southern African Customs Union (SACU),
350t, 351t, 359t, 362t, 364t, 365, 366t,
368t
South Korea, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t, 285, 286
sovereign equality, and decision making,
543, 560–3
sovereignty: and civil regimes in Africa,
207–210, 218–23; and decolonization
in Africa, 209–12; and human rights,
633–4, 635; and juridical statehood
in Africa, 215–18, 223–31; and
quasi-states in Africa, 212–15; and

Index
rational design theory, 415; and regime
development, 14–15; and structuralist
views of regime, 8; study of in context of
Africa, 205–207; and transnationalism,
9–10
Soviet Union: and boundaries in Europe after
World War II, 264–5, 267, 280n44,
282–3; and boundaries of successor
states, 276, 277; and intervention in
Afghanistan, 228n78. See also Cold
War
specificity, of norms, 237
Spector, L., 85n53
speed, and informal agreements, 312–14
spheres of influence, and Cold War, 121
Staiger, Robert, 97n13
Stalin, Josef, 306n29
standing, and access to dispute resolution,
137–40
START (strategic arms reduction talks)
agreements, 81, 103
STATA routine, and analysis of compliance
decisions, 588n56
state: and liability for violation of EU law,
504–10; liberal theories on behavior of,
632n30, 632n32; and responsibility for
genocide, 451–2; treaties and
reputation of, 306n29, 310n41. See also
democracy; juridical statehood;
politics; sovereignty
Stein, Arthur A., 19n2, 35
Stein, Eric, 470, 482n90
Stigler, George J., 304n24, 310n42
Stimson Doctrine (1931), 264, 278
Stokke, Olav Schram, 685n5
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT),
103, 294n3, 295, 297n8, 317n48, 315
strategic bombing, and norms on warfare,
243–4, 246t, 247
strategic gain, from territorial
aggrandizement, 287
strategic inconsistency, and legal consistency
within state, 705
structuralism: and image of international
relations, 229n81; and views on
importance of regimes, 6–7, 8, 9,
17
structural realism, and decision-making
rules, 544–5
subjects, and actors in operating system of
international law, 451–3

733

submarine warfare, 242–3, 244–5, 246t,
250–4, 257
subregimes, for international oil pollution
control, 658–63
substantive penetration, and legal
integration, 455
successor states, boundaries of, 276–7
Sudan, and interstate territorial aggressions,
273t
sui generis system, and plant genetic
resources, 696
Sullivan, John, 57
super-indictment, and war crimes tribunals,
609
‘‘supply and demand,’’ as metaphor in
discussion of demand for regimes,
20
supranational community, and European
Court of Justice, 143n17, 466–8
Sweden, and European Court of Human
Rights, 648n69
Sykes, Alan, 107
Syria, and territorial boundaries, 273t,
276n37
systemic level, of constraint-choice analysis
of demand for regimes, 20–3
tacit agreements, and implicit cooperation,
298n12, 321–5
Tadic, Dusko, 600–601
Tannenwald, Nina, 407
Tanzania, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 272t
tariffs: and creation of common markets,
459n17; and increases in imports,
177n30; trade negotiations and changes
in, 169, 170–1. See also General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Teitgen, Pierre-Henri, 636, 642
teleology, and institution design, 417–18
Temperley, Harold, 320n63
temporal dimension, of compliance, 82–4
Ten Oever case (1993), 502
tenure rules, and dispute resolution, 135,
136f
terra nullias, and views of Africa, 219
third parties: adjudication and delegation of
legal authority, 128; and cease-fire
agreements, 521, 535, 542; and dispute
settlement process in trade, 334, 336;
interstate and transnational dynamics

734

Index

of dispute resolution, 150; and
restrictions on warfare, 256
Thirty Years’ War, 284
Thornberry, Cedric, 599, 608
Thucydides, 43, 44, 228
Thursby, Marie, 339n18
time-varying covariates, and ceasefires,
526
Tlatelolco, Treaty of, 399
Tokyo Round (GATT), 555n45, 557–9.
See also General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade
Toope, Stephen J., 190n9, 194n19
Toqueville, Alexis de, 47, 52, 53, 64
Torrey Canyon (ship), 660
Toscano, Mario, 329n82
trade: asymmetry and proposed depth of
integration in pacts, 357–72; and depth
of cooperation, 104–105; and domestic
policy credibility, 650; increase in
groups participating in politics of,
158n2; legalism and dispute settlement,
333–44; legalization, information, and
mobilization of domestic groups,
159–72; and overview of regional
dispute settlement, 350–6; relationship
between legalization and, 182–5; and
studies of institutional form, 331–3; and
territorial aggression, 286; and tightly
binding rules, 172–85. See also exports;
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT); market(s); imports;
tariffs; World Trade Organization
(WTO)
Trade Policy Review Mechanism, and
GATT/WTO, 165–6
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property (TRIPs), 117, 552, 690, 696,
701, 704, 707. See also intellectual
property
trade rounds, of GATT/WTO, 553–60.
See also Tokyo Round; Uruguay Round
‘‘traditional knowledge,’’ and intellectual
property law, 707
transaction costs: and bargaining at GATT/
WTO, 566; and theory of demand for
international regimes, 29, 32–4
transitional practices, in monetary systems,
575, 580
transnational dispute resolution: and access
issues, 142–9; definition and

characteristics of, 131, 132, 140–2; and
dynamics of legalization, 149–55
transnational incrementalism, and European
integration, 477–8
transnationalism, and sovereignty, 9–10
transparency: and compliance, 94; of
democratic domestic politics, 54–6; and
oil pollution control treaties, 671–5;
and provision of information on trade,
166–7
treaties: and coalitions in European Union,
496–7; as compromise, 72–3; definition
of, 74n22; and degrees of specificity in
language, 78–9; and informal
agreements, 306–12, 325–9; and
international law, 75; and negotiations,
71–2; oil pollution and compliance
with, 654–5; and reporting
requirements, 86–7; use of term, 65n1,
74n22; and U.S. Constitution,
314n51–2. See also agreements;
ceasefires; compliance; dispute
resolution
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and
Under Water (1963), 117
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources (2002),
706
Trimble, Phillip R., 65n1, 70
Trotsky, Leon, 329
Tucker, Richard, 588n56
Tullock, Gordon, 30n22
Turkey: and free trade agreements, 348t,
349t, 351t, 363t, 366t; and interstate
territorial aggressions, 272t; and war
with Cyprus, 537
two-period game, and agreement flexibility,
384–5, 390
UDEAC. See Central African Customs and
Economic Union
Uganda, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 272t
uncertainty: and cease-fire agreements,
520–2; and costs of trade agreements,
174–5; and duration and renegotiation
provisions in treaties, 376, 377n5, 378,
392–6; and informal agreements,
314–18; and institution design, 409–11;
resolution of through learning,
398–400

Index
unitary state/opportunism model, for trade
liberalization, 181
United Arab Emirates, and interstate
territorial aggressions, 275t
United Kingdom. See Britain
United Nations (UN): boundaries and
charter of, 265; and human rights in
Africa, 231; and legal norms in General
Assembly declarations, 123; and
peaceful resolution of disputes as legal
obligation, 127n22; and registration of
international agreements, 329; and
Treaty Office, 65n1; and war crimes
tribunals, 445, 599–600
UN Commission for Human Rights
(UNCHR), 613
UN Conference on the Human Environment
(1972), 661
UN Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), 548
UN Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD, 1992), 378n6, 690, 695–9, 698f,
702, 703, 705
UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
622, 647
UN Declaration on the Granting
Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples (1960), 217, 265, 284–5
UN Emergency Force, 522n10
UN Environment Programme (UNEP), 72,
703
UN Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), 432, 689, 691f, 693–4, 695,
698f, 702, 703, 704
UN Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO), 537
UN Universal Declaration on Human
Rights, 622
United States: and conflicts with EC on
competition policy and antitrust,
313n49; and free trade agreement with
Israel, 350t, 352t, 355, 359t, 362t,
366t; and Genocide Convention, 446,
452; and Helsinki Final Act, 324n76;
and informal accords with Israel,
297n7; and International Criminal
Court, 450, 614–15; and interventions
in Grenada and Libya, 228n78; NATO
and reputation of, 308–309n37; and oil
pollution, 670; opposition to
international criminal court, 446–7;

735

rational design and Constitution of,
414–15; and retaliatory tariffs, 171;
and role of interest groups in trade
negotiations, 164n9; and status of
Helsinki agreement in international
law, 326n76; treaties and Constitution
of, 314n51–2. See also Cold War;
Cuba; General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT); North American
Free Trade Agreement; Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty; World Trade
Organization (WTO)
universality, of international monetary
system, 583
UPOV. See International Convention for
the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants
Upper Volta, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 273t
Uruguay Round (GATT), 104, 105, 155n41,
165, 183, 360n40, 555n45, 559–60,
704n45. See also General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade
usage, and regime development, 15–16
Usher, John, 467n32
uti possidetis, and International Court of
Justice, 279
utopianism, and realism, 419–20
values: and public preferences of liberal
democracies, 51–3; and regime
development, 14. See also norm(s)
Van de Walle, Nicholas, 50, 61n52
Van Doren, Charles N., 393, 397
Van Duyn case (1973), 505
Van Evera, Stephen, 632n30
Van Gend and Loos (1963), 152, 469, 473,
478n78, 481
Van Schaack, Beth, 445n38
Vattel, Emetic de, 226
Veitch, John M., 311n44
Velde, FranC
¸ ois, 55
Venezuela, and free trade agreements, 346t,
358t, 362t, 363t, 364t
verification, of cease-fire agreements, 521
Vernon, Raymond, 317n59
Verrier, T., 667n39
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations, 122
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
65n1, 74n22, 76n29, 83, 301

736

Index

Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer (1985), 120
Vietnam, and interstate territorial
aggressions, 274t, 275t
Vincent, R. J., 229
volatility, of international monetary system,
580–3
Volcansek, Mary L., 467n32, 472n53,
485
Vroege case (1994), 502–503
Wacziarg, Romain, 342n30
Wallace, Henry, 322n70
Wallace-Bruce, N. L., 225
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 14n22
Walt, Stephen M., 312n47
Walter, Barbara F., 519n8
Waltz, Kenneth, 4, 7–8, 24, 47, 49, 627
war crimes tribunals: and Bosnia, 592–6;
and Cambodia, 611–12; establishment
of, 448, 594, 590, 647; evaluation of,
615–21; ideas, interests, and
institutions of, 595–8; and Indonesia
and East Timor, 612–13; and
International Criminal Court, 613–15;
and Kosovo, 607–610; and Rwanda,
602–606
Ward, Michael D., 268n36
warfare: interstate territorial from
1648–2000, 262t; and jus belli, 595;
norms and restrictions on, 234,
240–58; preemption as cause of,
519n7; and territorial aggression since
1946, 267–76, 268–73t, 274, 280.
See also arms control; ceasefires;
chemical warfare; military; peace; war
crimes tribunals; World War I; World
War II
Washington Conference on the Limitation of
Armaments (1921–22), 244
Waters, William G., 667n39
Watson, Adam, 208n12, 214, 596n10
Watson, Rear Admiral B. C., 257
Weber, Max, 7, 14, 596n10
weighted voting, and decision-making rules,
543
Weiler, Joseph, 153, 476n70, 477, 484, 485
Weingast, Barry, 55
Weiss, Edith Brown, 685n5
Wendt, Alexander, 236, 410n29, 411n33
Werner, Suzanne, 524n12, 530n15, 524

West African Economic Community
(CEAO), 345t, 354t, 356, 358t, 362t,
363t, 364t, 366t, 368t
Westphalia, Peace of (1648), 260
Wight, Martin, 206, 216, 223, 226n76,
232
wildlife and habitat protection: and
biodiversity, 694; and compliance
systems, 682, 687
Williamson, Oliver R., 305n28, 308n36,
340n21
Wilson, Woodrow, 263, 264, 281, 282, 284,
328n80, 329
Winham, Gilbert R., 555n45
women, and European Court of Justice on
equal treatment, 500–504
World Bank, 119–21. See also International
Monetary Fund
World Intellectual Property Organization,
552, 707
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), 72n15
World Trade Organization (WTO):
bargaining and outcomes in, 547–52;
and biodiversity, 704; and deep
cooperation, 104–105; and dimensions
of legalization, 118, 119; and dispute
resolution, 135, 138, 140–1, 153–5,
180–5, 186–7; and enforcement
structures, 174–5, 176; and
information, 165–6; and interest
groups, 168, 184; and organized
hypocrisy of consensus decision
making, 546, 564–7; and retaliation,
170–1; and sovereign equality rules,
560–3; and trade rounds, 553–60.
See also General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade; Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS)
World War I: and monetary system, 570; and
submarine warfare, 242; and territorial
issues, 263–4, 278, 282
World War II: and fear of territorial
aggrandizement, 278–9; and genocide,
452; international boundaries after,
264–5, 282–3; and norms of warfare,
234, 240–58
written agreements, and form of informal
agreements, 296–7
WTO. See World Trade Organization

Index
Yarbrough, Beth V. & Robert M., 337n10
Yom Kippur War, 539
Young, Oran R., 22n9, 35n34, 66n2, 92, 94,
597n13, 616, 685n5
Yugoslavia: and boundaries of
successor states, 276–7; and
genocide, 445, 448–9, 451, 452;

737
and interstate territorial aggressions,
272t. See also Bosnia; Croatia;
Kosovo

Zacher, Mark W., 658n14, 663n29
Zaide-Pritchard, Sonia, 658n14
Zaire. See Congo

