Cat: Politics and Laws
sub_cat : politics


Political Philosophy

Political Philosophy is a comprehensive introduction to the major
thinkers and topics in political philosophy. It explores the
philosophical traditions which have formed and continue to
inform our political judgements. Dudley Knowles introduces the
ideas of key political thinkers including Hobbes, Locke, Marx and
Mill and inﬂuential contemporary thinkers such as Berlin, Rawls
and Nozick.
The individual chapters discuss and analyse the ideas of utilitarianism, liberty, rights, justice, obligation and democracy. As
well as outlining central problems in political philosophy, Knowles
encourages the reader to critically engage with all the issues
discussed.
Political Philosophy is written in a fresh and easily readable
style and is ideally suited to students taking introductory courses
in political theory and philosophy as well as the general reader.
Dudley Knowles is Senior Lecturer in Philosophy at the University of Glasgow. He is the author of the Routledge Philosophy
GuideBook to Hegel and the Philosophy of Right.

Fundamentals of Philosophy

Series Editor: John Shand
This series presents an up-to-date set of engrossing, accurate and
lively introductions to all the core areas of philosophy. Each volume is written by an enthusiastic and knowledgeable teacher of
the area in question. Care has been taken to produce works that
while even-handed are not mere bland expositions, and as such are
original pieces of philosophy in their own right. The reader should
not only be well informed by the series, but also experience the
intellectual excitement of being engaged in philosophical debate
itself. The volumes serve as an essential basis for the undergradute
courses to which they relate, as well as being accessible and
absorbing for the general reader. Together they comprise an
indispensable library of living philosophy.
Published:
Dudley Knowles
Political Philosophy
Piers Benn
Ethics
Alexander Bird
Philosophy of Science
Stephen Burwood, Paul Gilbert and Kathleen Lennon
Philosophy of Mind
Colin Lyas
Aesthetics
Alexander Miller
Philosophy of Language
Forthcoming:
Richard Francks
Modern Philosophy
Greg Restall
Logic
Suzanne Stern-Gillet
Ancient Philosophy
Simon Glendinning
Continental Philosophy

Political Philosophy

Dudley Knowles

London

First published 2001
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2001.
© 2001 Dudley Knowles
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library
ISBN 1–85728–760–6 (hbk)
ISBN 1–85728–550–6 (pbk)
ISBN 0-203-18788-1 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-18911-6 (Glassbook Format)

To my mother, Margaret Knowles, and, in memoriam, GRK, DAK,
AK, KC and EJC

Contents

Preface
1

Introduction

The methods of ethics and political philosophy
A methodological impasse?
Reﬂective equilibrium

xi
1
3
3
9

Political philosophy

14

2

23

Utilitarianism

The foundations of utilitarianism
Formal theory
Value theory

24
25
38

Utilitarian political philosophy
Liberty
Rights
Distributive justice
The state

45
45
49
51
58

Conclusion

64

3

69

Liberty

Introduction

69

vii

CONTENTS

Liberty, liberalism, libertarianism
Analysis
Isaiah Berlin: negative and positive liberty
The republican theory of freedom

70
71
74
85

The value of freedom
Freedom of action
Autonomy
Moral freedom
Toleration

88
90
92
98
100

Free states and free citizens
Democratic freedom
Civil liberty
Mill’s harm principle
Supplementary principles

104
105
107
108
113

Conclusion

129

4

Rights

133

Introduction

133

Analysis and deﬁnition
Preliminaries
Hohfeld’s classiﬁcation

135
135
138

The justiﬁcation of rights
Lockean themes: modes of ownership
Autonomy again
Rights and interests
Rights and utility
The no-theory theory

155
155
159
165
169
174

5

177

Distributive justice

Entitlement
Nozick’s theory of entitlement
F.A. Hayek
Private property

178
179
188
192

Human needs

195

viii

CONTENTS

Equality of what?

206

John Rawls’s theory of justice
Justice as fairness
The Original Position
The principles of justice
Desert
The communitarian challenge

215
215
220
225
232
235

6

239

Political obligation

The problems

239

Anarchism and communitarianism

248

Consent and contract
Original contracts
Express consent
Tacit consent
Quasi-consent
Hypothetical consent and hypothetical contract

260
263
264
266
271
276

The beneﬁts of good government
The principle of fairness
Gratitude and good government

282
283
288

Conclusion

296

7

299

Democracy

Introduction

299


Cat:Politics and Laws
sub_cat: Politics

Rousseau: freedom, equality and the general will

302

Direct and representative democracy

311

Democracy and majority tyranny

319

Democracy, deliberation and disagreement

326

Notes

343

Bibliography

375

Index

387
ix

Preface
Political philosophy is a hard subject of study, but an attractive
one, too. It is hard because the central concepts have been fashioned as much in the hurly-burly of political dispute as in the
philosopher’s study. These concepts have served as ﬂags around
which contending causes have rallied, banners for which opposing
parties have fought – too often literally. Unlike many of the topics
of metaphysics, say, they always have a resonance for issues of
active controversy. They are the recognized currency of political
argument and debate. This immersion in our practical concerns
might be thought to contaminate the discipline, ensuring that no
work in political philosophy is without the taint of allegiance. But
this would be to suppose that there is a pristine science of political
concepts waiting to be unearthed from the debris of interminable
conﬂict, that the concepts can be scrubbed down and examined
free of the scrapes and bruises inﬂicted by their rhetorical
employment. There is no such science; there is no ‘ﬁrst philosophy’
of political life. Yet it is vital that political philosophy be a careful
academic discipline precisely because it is never merely that. It is
vital that it be as scrupulous and transparent as its maker can
manage because it will always be taken to be a contribution to
struggles for power and campaigns for policies.
This makes it hard to do well. No one with a passion for political
ideas can be detached from the circumstances of their employment. Political philosophy is attractive because it promises a deep
understanding of the values at stake in daily strife, it promises a

xi

PREFACE

defence of causes that are dear to us. But careful thought may
reveal that the defences are ﬂimsy or that the values are confused.
Most political philosophers will have a political agenda which
governs their personal contribution to public affairs, and no doubt
you will have worked out elements of mine by the time you ﬁnish
this book. But philosophy is an open-minded discipline, so, paradoxically, personal commitments must be regarded as provisional,
having no more credibility than is conferred on them by the
strength of their supporting arguments.
I am particularly conscious of this since I have to report that my
philosophical position has changed during the course of writing
this book. When I began it, too long ago, I believed that the basic
principles of liberal democracy should ﬁnd universal acceptance.
The grounding beliefs, that mankind is born free and equal,
seemed to me to be basic elements of a common culture that have
anchored themselves in the mind-sets of modern men and women.
We think of ourselves in this fashion, willy-nilly. These are the
guiding principles history has bequeathed us. So I didn’t think of
liberalism as a radical point of view. I thought of it as mother’s
milk to the political sentiments of all good citizens. I believed, in
the modern world, that the true conservative who is respectful of
the traditions of thought that have formed us and our political
environment, would be a liberal at least in the sense of accepting
some story about universal freedom and equality, and distrustful
of claims to authority. Of course, I recognized that values as
loosely conceived as these require clariﬁcation and analysis, that
tensions and confusions would be revealed as the grounding intuitions were worked up into principles and theories of a speciﬁcity
that could bear examination and assessment. But I didn’t doubt
that some cogent articulation of these values was the prospectus
of philosophers and thoughtful citizens alike.
What I had ignored was the dire effects of religious belief, in
particular the power of religion to corrode sentiments as crucial
to peaceful social co-existence as mutual respect and relaxed tolerance. The most noxious human capacities, agression, hatred and
cruelty, seem to coagulate around religious beliefs which advertise
their necessary distinctiveness, and then are transmuted into
communal militancy. As the hatreds expressive of conﬂicts
between political ideologies seem to have dried up, militant

xii

PREFACE

religion has stepped into the breach and now fuels murderous
internecine conﬂicts worldwide – last year the former Yugoslavia,
last month Indonesia, this week Nigeria. Doctors are murdered
outside abortion clinics in the USA, and shoppers are blown up in
Omagh. Hegel makes us shiver when he describes the mentality of
the Terror in Revolutionary France as death, ‘the coldest and
meanest of all deaths, with no more signiﬁcance than cutting off a
head of cabbage’.1 Rarely does a week go by nowadays without our
seeing some TV footage of bodies piled into trenches, disposed of
in the manner of waste vegetables.
So now I am a partisan, even militant, liberal. I despair of the
prospect of ﬁnding common ground with those whose religious
beliefs prescind from civility, from the task of seeking, minimally, a
modus vivendi or, maximally, substantial agreement. I no longer
see the sole task of political philosophy as the Hegelian enterprise
of exploring and refashioning a consensus. Nowadays, we have to
give as much attention to the dire task of drawing lines in the sand,
marking off values which we recognize that only some of our fellows deem worthy of defence, values that are all the more crucial
for being seemingly parochial.
When my efforts are set against this agenda, I don’t claim to have
accomplished much. On reﬂection, rarely do I reach deﬁnitive conclusions. What I do hope is to have placed some intellectual
resources at the disposal of openly enquiring minds, raising questions, drafting lines of argument, provoking the kind of disagreement that challenges the reader to respond. I have concentrated on
what I believe are the central areas of investigation. Though I am
no card-carrying utilitarian, I examine the utilitarian theory in
detail because I believe it is the most powerful, sophisticated and
inﬂuential normative theory which is available to us, for better or
worse. Next, I examine the core ideals of liberty, rights and justice
in the distribution of goods. Next, I study the problem of political
obligation, asking whether the state can make good its claim to
rightful authority over its citizens. Finally, I look at constitutional
issues, investigating the ethical credentials of democracy.
This self-directed focus has made it impossible for me to discuss
many issues in political philosophy which have a direct bearing
on practical and often urgent policy issues. So I don’t discuss
separately the politics of race, the particular injustice of racial

xiii

PREFACE

discrimination or the legitimacy of afﬁrmative action or reverse
discrimination. I don’t discuss justice between the sexes or the
feminist contribution to political philosophy. I don’t discuss the
acceptability of nationalism, the ethical implications of multiculturalism, or the proper conduct of international relations,
except by way of example when other issues are in focus. I regret
all of these omissions, but hope that those who are encouraged to
tackle the questions I haven’t raised may ﬁnd in the book materials
to help them in their efforts.
It is impossible to complete a work of this sort without accumulating debts. Some of them are acknowledged in the text, some
unfortunately not. The bibliography furnishes a partial guide to
my reading, but I should record the books I have had alongside
my desk throughout the period of composition. Unsurprisingly
perhaps, these have been Hobbes’s Leviathan, Locke’s Second
Treatise, Hume’s Treatise, Second Enquiry and Essays, Rousseau’s
Discourse on the Origins of Inequality and Social Contract, Hegel’s
Philosophy of Right, J.S. Mill’s Utilitarianism and On Liberty,
Rawls’s Theory of Justice. Temperamentally, I don’t seem to make
much progress in political philosophy without ﬁrst stepping back
and studying what these giants of the discipline have to say.
My acknowledgement of personal debts must also be patchy.
Students can always be relied upon to prompt their teachers into
rethinking positions which would otherwise solidify into nostrums. Colleagues who, after reading students’ work or listening to
them in tutorials, stop me in the corridor and ask ‘Do you tell them
that ?’, have similar effects – collapse of stout party and back to the
drawing-board. Over the years, bits of this material have been read
to philosophers in Glasgow and other universities, and I have welcomed and sometimes used their comments. Nick Zangwill read
some of the manuscript material and I beneﬁted from his advice.
John Shand read early versions of the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters, correcting errors and helping me clarify obscure material. Pat Shaw has
read just about all of it; his criticisms, advice and encouragement
have been invaluable. I am a duffer with a word processor and all
things IT. My neighbours on the top ﬂoor of the philosophy
department in Glasgow, Angus McKay and Susan Stuart, have
responded kindly and patiently to my pathetic, panicky, pleas for
assistance. John Shand, the series editor, and Tony Bruce and

xiv

PREFACE

Muna Khogali at Routledge, have been helpful and accommodating in the face of my prevarications and the anonymous referees
they have recruited have improved the ﬁnal version.
Since I expect that this book will be used largely for teaching, it
is appropriate that I thank my teachers of political philosophy. I
was ﬁrst introduced to the subject at Kirkham Grammar School by
Bernard Coates. There was no National Curriculum and political
philosophy was certainly not on the examination syllabus, but
Bernard thought it would be interesting for us to discuss the contract theories of Hobbes and Locke, so we did. I was so excited I
immediately took the only valuable book in the house, a beautiful,
many-volume work on The Horse: Its Treatment in Health and Disease, and swapped it for a tatty copy of Sabine’s History of Political
Thought. I suspect the booksellers, Messrs Halewood, of Friargate, Preston, are still laughing. This initial interest was rekindled
in London, when I found myself preparing abstracts of material
directed to questions my brother had spotted for his ﬁnal exams at
the LSE, but unfortunately had not had any time to study. It was
fostered at Bedford College, London, by David Lloyd-Thomas, who
had the wonderful, generous gift of ﬁnding good and interesting
ideas in the most hurried and turgid essays I presented to him. My
interests were further encouraged by Robin Downie when I came
to Glasgow. It’s a pleasure to acknowledge my debts to all of them
and express my gratitude.
My wife, Anne, has had a lot to suffer in the preparation of this
book. Mercifully she takes no interest at all in its contents, not
having a philosophical bone in her body – so I thank her for the
blessed relief.

xv

Chapter 1

Introduction

Young children, we understand, are born philosophers. They ask
exasperated parents such deep questions as ‘Where is my mind?’ or
‘Is Granny living with all the other dead people in the churchyard?’. The spirit for philosophy which is born out of naïveté is
soon extinguished, so the taste for philosophical reﬂection has to
be rediscovered. I conjecture that it is an acquired taste, prompted
by some strange contingency. Who knows the story behind your
picking up this book? Still, some brands of philosophical enquiry
are more likely to be prompted than others. An adolescent who
found himself pondering the nature of numbers would be a splendid eccentric. By contrast, youthful rebellion can be relied upon to
kindle low-level philosophical musings about the rules of
behaviour. If parents say such and such is the right thing to do and
the teenager insists that he does no wrong in not doing it, the
conﬂict of views is likely to raise all sorts of philosophical questions: What is the nature and extent of parents’ authority? What
sort of respect is required for their rules? They can enforce their
demands and prudence may dictate compliance, but does that

1

INTRODUCTION

make it right? If the question of who decides what behaviour is
acceptable and what is not seems up for grabs, the question of how
to decide will surely follow. Is it a matter of choice or preference or
personal belief ? And so on.
Such questions (and many more) comprise the subject of ethics,
and I suspect that most people dip their toes into the water in the
minimal sense of recognizing that there are questions to be
answered, issues to be debated. Political life has the same character of putting philosophical questions up front. Authoritarian
regimes prompt the same reﬂections as authoritarian parents.
Democratic regimes conduct debates about competing policies in
terms of the values such policies embody. Liberty may be opposed
to justice. The public interest may require the sacriﬁce of persons’
rights. This is the diet of editorials in tabloids as well as the broadsheet newspapers. Questions of ethics and political philosophy are
ubiquitous, in the very air we breathe. The surprise for many is
that the problems are not novel, that there is a rich history of
careful deliberation about them, that the questions which seem
fresh in 2000 have often been recorded as debated for the last
two and a half millenia.
We are heirs to this rich tradition of philosophical dispute.
Though philosophical problems seemingly spring up afresh each
day like mushrooms, similar problems have been worrying folks for
as long as intellectual problems have been recorded. When we take
seriously the philosophical questions posed directly in political
life, we encounter immediately a vast literature organized around
the problems mankind has encountered, the philosophers who
have contributed to their solution and the theories that have been
recurrently proposed as the means of tackling them.
The prospect can appear dismal. You ask: Do I have an obligation to obey the law? and one of nature’s teachers gives you a
reading-list – as they say, from Plato to NATO. In truth, this should
be a source of excitement, since the history of philosophy does not
parade itself as a progressive discipline in the manner of the history of science. You can learn from the Ancient Greeks, not least
because the present is a small parish inhibited by parochial concerns. Escape into past ways of thinking, in philosophy if not in
physics, can be a liberation. What a marvel it is to read Plato’s
report in the Republic of Socrates working out why might is not

2

INTRODUCTION

right, or Hobbes at the time of the English Civil War describing
anarchy and arguing for the necessity of an absolute or
unrestricted sovereign power. These are people you will want to
argue with and you will ﬁnd, to your pleasure, that it can be hard
to do so.
Everyone who studies political philosophy has to know something about the history of the subject because that history is a
priceless resource as much as it is an antiquarian interest. But this
book will not address this history directly. Rather we shall concentrate on the central questions of political philosophy and the leading theories that have been employed to answer them. For the
moment, I want to examine the methodology of political philosophy, to say a little more about the relationship of theory to
judgement in the sphere of ethics – of which political philosophy
is evidently a part.

The methods of ethics and political philosophy
A methodological impasse?
Let’s begin our reﬂections with a hackneyed example. Suppose we
have a sheriff who, along with utilitarian thinkers, believes the
right action is the one that produces the greatest human welfare.
Faced with a rioting mob, he decides a scapegoat is required to
prevent widespread harm. He selects a plausible (but innocent)
culprit for punishment and calm is restored. Harm and injustice is
done to the poor innocent – but the greater evil is averted. The
utilitarian sheriff defends his action as the right thing to do in the
circumstances. A critic objects. The sheriff’s action was wrong
because it was unjust. No amount of beneﬁt to any number of
third parties can vindicate the punishment of an innocent man or
woman. That principle is inviolable.
How are we to adjudicate the issue? On the side of the sheriff,
supposing all the facts of the case are right, is a deep and plausible
moral theory. The pity is that this theory of what constitutes right
action commits him to doing what would normally be judged a
wrong action. On the side of the critic is the principle (‘intuition’
is the term often used here) that it is unjust, and therefore wrong,

3

INTRODUCTION

to punish the innocent. The sheriff has a theory, which he can
defend if pressed, which enables him to judge what is right in
tricky cases like this. She (the critic) thinks that his theory is
indefensible if it justiﬁes him acting in a way that violates her
principle. So – do we keep the theory and sacriﬁce the principle or
do we jettison the theory because we cannot ﬁnd it in us to reject
the principle?
This question, often posed in the discussion of utilitarianism, is,
at bottom a dispute about methodology. There are many ways forward and all of them are controversial since philosophical dispute
reaches into the methods of ethical and political theory as well as
the diet of problems which give rise to speculation about the
appropriate method for tackling them. First, we need to understand the notion of a theory as the sheriff is employing it. The ﬁrst,
simplest, conception takes the theory to be a systematization of
the moral and political judgements we are inclined to make. We
ﬁnd ourselves judging that this action is right, that action wrong,
that this system is fair, that unjust. And we accord these judgements considerable status. They are not self-evident or absolutely
unrevisable, but we are more likely to stick to them than we are to
accept a theory which is inconsistent with them. We recognize that
we operate with a great and complex stack of moral principles and
reﬂection suggests that such judgements are the product of a
deeper principle – in the case of the sheriff, the utilitarian view
that actions and practices are right if they maximize well-being.
We have explained the judgements we reach, but this explanation
may serve wider purposes. It may guide us when we ﬁnd ourselves
in a difﬁcult dilemma. In entirely novel circumstances, of the sort
that medical advances seem to throw up daily, the theory may show
us the way forward. Obviously, this conception of moral theory
cannot help us if we review the above example. The sheriff and his
critic differ precisely on whether the case represents a decisive
example which should cause us to reject or qualify the theory.
Since both agree that what is decisive is the authority of the particular moral judgement or rule, I shall dub this view
‘particularist’.1
A different conception of moral theory regards the task of
the theorist very differently. On this account, the task of moral
theory is to validate or generate moral principles, to serve as a

4

INTRODUCTION

foundation for them. Utilitarianism may be viewed in this light,
too, since, as we shall see, its techniques may be employed to assess
not just speciﬁc actions and practices, but moral rules as well. If
this is right, if some such theory ﬁnds conviction, whether it is
utilitarianism, Kantian formalism which uses the test of the
categorical imperative, contractualism or the theory of Divine
Command, it follows that our intuitions regarding subordinate
principles are all revisable in light of the theory to hand. Possession of such a theory would settle the dilemma posed by the
sheriff’s actions and the critic’s challenge. We can dub this notion
of theory ‘foundationalist’ – again with warnings about incautious
use of the terminology. Unfortunately, I have no such theory to
hand, believing that all attempts to delineate such an ambitous
project have failed.
We have two different conceptions of moral theory and two different accounts of the status and revisability of the moral judgements and principles that such theories (in their different ways)
encompass. It is worth noticing that these disputes about the
nature of normative ethics ﬁnd an echo in deep disputes about the
appropriate methods of political philosophy. Hegel noticed that
modern subjects claim what he described as ‘the right of the subjective will’, a distinctively modern attitude which claims ‘that
whatever it is to recognize as valid should be perceived by it as
good ’. (Alternatively: ‘The right to recognize nothing that I do not
perceive as rational is the highest right of the subject.’)2 This
stance may be dubbed ‘individualist’ or even ‘liberal’. It echoes
Kant’s claim that ‘Our age is the genuine age of criticism, to which
everything must submit’.3 In this context, the thought is that the
individual who seeks the credentials of principles or institutions
has detached himself from their moral ‘pull’ in order to conduct
his investigation. He has placed himself above the mêlée, abstracting from all prejudice and allegiance in order to carry out a judicious review of what theory (in the guise of reason) requires. Suppose I ﬁnd myself questioning the obligations I hitherto felt to a
parent or a child. I see others behaving differently and wonder if
perhaps I can legitimately do the same. It looks as though the only
way I can examine these questions is by stepping outside of the
institutions of domesticity and subjecting them to an external
assessment. Or suppose I ﬁnd myself breaking the law with

5

INTRODUCTION

impunity and no sense of guilt – buying my under-age child a glass
of cider in a country pub. Being philosophical, this causes me to
wonder whether I have a general obligation to obey the law. Again,
once prompted, once the question has been asked, I ﬁnd myself at a
distance from the press of what hitherto I had taken to be an obligation. Detaching myself from the moral force of the institutions
that bind me by their rules, I can pursue my investigation as an
outsider would. Should I subscribe to this general rule or should
I modify or reject it in the light of the best reasoning I can
command, the best theory at my disposal?
In the seventeenth century, for a variety of reasons, philosophers who reﬂected on politics began to question the grounds of
their allegiance and the legitimacy of the constitutions of particular states. From what stance could this appraisal be conducted? It
seemed obvious to some that the best way to answer the question of
whether or not they had good reason to obey a sovereign power was
to hypothesize that they had none – and then ask whether rational
agents with a speciﬁc set of wants (Hobbes) or wants and values
(Locke) would have good reason to establish one. They deduced
that those without a sovereign power (as they said, in a State of
Nature) would recognize that a sovereign ought to be instituted;
those who found themselves already subject to the claims of sovereign authority should recognize it as legitimate. The reasoning
which generated these conclusions could be advanced by (or
expained to) each sceptical individual. Individualism of this methodological stripe has its origin in a sceptical impulse that subjects
to scrutiny what many take to be the givens of one’s moral and
political regime. In order to conduct this scrutiny, it is evidently
necessary to have some theory at hand that can serve as the test of
the principles called for judgement. It is worth adding at this point
that those who detach themselves in thought from the concrete
demands of the institutions which govern them, seeking a rationale that should be good for any enquirer, generally attribute to all
persons a moral status that endows them with liberty and equality
as well as the universal ends of survival and ‘commodious living’.4
In a nut-shell, this is why individualism as I have described it may
also be termed ‘liberalism’. (And while we’re charting the ‘isms’,
this stance of the detached, disengaged, perhaps alienated,
enquirer may be described as ‘atomism’ if a society is thought to

6

INTRODUCTION

comprise an aggregate of such individuals. But an intellectual
health warning should be issued concerning the careless use of
philosophical labels!)
By contrast, a different view will reject the possibility of this
radically abstracted self. Call its protagonist the ‘communitarian’.
She will insist that we cannot, even in thought, strip off the lineaments of our personalities – for our moral constitution goes as
deep as this. For better or worse, we are burdened by intuitions
concerning the moral standing of ourselves and others and what it
is for folks like us to live well. Our views on these matters are not
optional extras; they will be embedded deeply in our language and
the very ways we think. On an extreme view, we just ﬁnd ourself
located at a particular, speciﬁable, moral address. According to
some feminists, humans are possessed of a socially constructed
gender which has determined in a fundamental way their moral
orientation – towards categories of rules and duties (men) or virtues of care and compassion (women). Most of us are enmeshed in
families whose structures are describable in terms of rights and
duties from which we cannot renege without doing wrong. These
families may ﬁnd their origins, sustenance and detailed regulation
within a tribe or race, which may subscribe to a religion or worldview which gives point to its ceremonies and rituals. Such wider
communities may inhabit a region with environmental exigencies
which structure their domestic constitution. In the modern world
they are likely to be regulated by a state whose history (and myths)
deeply engage the allegiance of the people.
Our identities may be thick with attachments and emotional ties
deriving from all of these sources and more; attachments and ties
which cannot be repudiated or even questioned without the deepest personal loss and fragmentation. Such a dense moral address
Hegel called our ‘ethical life’. Its reality and the objectivity of the
claims it makes upon us he called ‘ethical substance’.
The modern debate between the individualist and the communitarian is not a fad of the moment. It echoes (in a distorted fashion,
for historical purists) the contrasting views of Plato and Aristotle
on the good society – Plato advancing a utopian vision founded on
a conception of justice he worked hard to elaborate, Aristotle
describing those institutions mankind has discovered to be necessary for the fullest expression of human nature. At the turn of the

7

INTRODUCTION

nineteeth century, battle was renewed again between another pair
of near contemporaries, Kant and Hegel – Kant aspiring to a
standpoint of reason which in ethics takes us right outside the
phenomenal world of everyday experience into a noumenal world
where principles of practical reason are disclosed to any dispassionate enquirer; Hegel, by contrast, ﬁnding this standpoint
‘empty’ and counselling us to seek a deep understanding of the
principles and institutions which history has deposited as the
framework of our social lives. To grossly caricature the contrast,
the individualist seeks a perspective of reason whereas the communitarian articulates a description of ethical reality.
In the context of political philosophy, I am tempted to label the
respective camps ‘radical’ and ‘conservative’. The individualist
position is radical because of the implicit commitment to subject
all beliefs and institutions to review, according none a privileged
status of critical immunity. The communitarian position is conservative in the sense that it accepts the validity of central categories of moral self-description which are entrenched within the
practices and institutions of society. We cannot escape those
dimensions of moral vision and feeling in which we have been
enclosed by socialization. Outside of the sense of ourselves which
the communitarian philosopher articulates, we would not employ
the sharp vision of the detached critic; we would be altogether lost
and aimless, without any sense of characteristic human ends or
aspirations. We must begin at that place where we come from.
The issue is complex, but it should not be too hard to see how
this dispute about the character of political theorizing reproduces
the methodological disputes recorded earlier. The ﬁrst should be
obvious. In the ﬁrst part of this chapter, I contrasted the respective
approaches of the foundationalist, the theorist who wields a
decisive theory, and the particularist, the thinker who takes her
stand on principles or intuitions. The differences evinced by these
two approaches reﬂect a pair of contrary dispositions – a top-down
impulse to validate and a bottom-up need to explain and systematize. I believe that, in so far as the individualist/communitarian
distinction is concerned with the methodology of ethics and politics, the same two dispositions are at work. The individualist, as
I have characterized this position, is committed primarily to
evaluation from a theoretical stance he endorses. Unless rules,

8

INTRODUCTION

principles, practices and institutions can be validated in the light
of higher values to which he subscribes he will not authorize them,
they have no claim to legitimacy. The communitarian, by contrast,
is distinguished by what she takes as given, the values, principles,
practices and institutions which constitute her historically contingent identity. She cannot, in fact, detach herself in principle so
as to achieve a theoretical stance from which her commitments
can be appraised.
Reflective equilibrium
Back to the sheriff’s dilemma. Since we don’t possess the quick ﬁx
of a theory which can review the situation and settle decisively
whether the sheriff or his critic is right or wrong,5 a ﬁrst way
forward is to expand the data available for judgement and hope
that with more information to hand some agreement may be
attained. We may amplify the detail of the example. The description already available is true, we have supposed, but that does not
establish that it is sufﬁcient for a correct verdict to be reached. In
fact, the opposite is the case. The information given in the example
is palpably insufﬁcient for a consensus on the rightness or wrongness of what the sheriff has done. When more information is
brought to bear – perhaps the critic can get the sheriff to agree
that he can’t keep secret his practice of framing innocents and so
lots of citizens will become anxious that they may be selected as
scapegoats – it may transpire that theory and intuition are brought
into line as protagonists agree that the example has not shown that
maximizing human welfare can require acts of injustice.
Second, we may review the theory. We may limit its ambitions,
draw in some of its horns. We can supplement the restricted theory
with another, different one which offers a better explanation or
justiﬁcation of the troublesome case. The resulting bunch of theories will be messier, an altogether less elegant intellectual structure and perhaps it will create boundary problems within the body
of theory which has been yoked together. But this may be a price
worth paying if the resultant structure promises an understanding
of how we reach decisions in a disconcertingly wide range of cases.
In the case of the sheriff, we may limit the scope of utilitarian

9

INTRODUCTION

reasoning and insist that independent principles of retributive
justice apply.
Third, we may review the principle about which the critic was so
conﬁdent. Perhaps we can get her to accept that there are circumstances, real or hypothetical, where it seems to imply conclusions
which are unacceptable. An example which illustrates much the
same point as that of the sheriff who lynches the plausible scapegoat, but which can trigger very different reactions, concerns the
reality of systems of criminal justice. Let’s all agree that in this
world of fallible human beings it is quite impossible to devise a
criminal justice system which can be guaranteed never to convict
an innocent. Different mixes of procedural rules will generate different probabilities of innocents being acquitted or convicted.
Now suppose we have to set up such a system or endorse a system
which is in place. We know that sooner or later an innocent will be
punished. We know that some unfortunate individual will have to
pay for the utility (or justice) of our having instituted a workable
system of trial and punishment to deal with criminals. Against
this background – of having to establish some systematic procedures for responding to crime – the critic may come to recognize
that, in practice, any such response will permit unintentional and
undiscovered miscarriages of justice. Examples such as this may
cause the critic who is conﬁdent in her intuitions of principle
concerning the punishment of the innocent to register a doubt. In
which case she, too, may be willing to enter negotiations when
theory collides with intuition.
Let us review the conclusions of this discussion of the methodology of ethics. In my book there are two villains. The ﬁrst is the
philosopher who claims one can get nowhere in ethics until one
has discovered, through a priori reasoning or the investigation of a
sufﬁcient range of moral judgement, some high-level theory of ethics which can serve the purposes of testing lower-level principles
of action and generating verdicts of right/wrong, good/bad, just/
unjust in respect of any particular action brought forward for
judgement. The second villain is the philosopher (or ordinary
moral agent) who believes himself endowed with a set of moral
principles or intuitions which are in principle immune to correction, which brook no qualiﬁcation or exception, nor require
careful contextual elaboration.

10

INTRODUCTION

What we are left with is a pair of propensities which draw away
from and collide with each other in fruitful co-existence. The ﬁrst
is a bottom-up drive to gather together judgements made in particular cases and formulate principles which articulate the rationale of these judgements. We go further. Having to hand a set of
principles, we can try to establish whether this exhibits any common features which we might employ to propose a still more general theory of ethics. Success in this endeavour would advance our
understanding of a crucial range of human activities.
The second propensity is as powerful as the ﬁrst and best
thought of as a top-down impulse to cleanse our intellectual
stables. It ﬁnds its beginnings in what may seem an incontrovertible insight into the nature of morality – and there are conspicuous modern candidates. For the utilitarian, morality is concerned
at base with the promotion of human well-being and the relief of
human suffering; for the Kantian, it expresses our nature as
rational and autonomous creatures; for the contractualist, it elaborates and represents the employment of a need to ﬁnd agreement
if conﬂict is to be avoided and co-operation facilitated, or alternatively, it expresses the need we feel to justify our conduct to
others. Whichever core insight we ﬁx on is then developed into a
theory of great generality, and is consequently used in a review of
our judgements on actions and institutions, although again there
will probably be an intermediate stage of assessment where rules
and principles are subject to inspection.
I say both bottom-up and top-down strategies are propensities
because we operate consciously and spontaneously in both ways,
when we act, when we judge and when we theorize. We evaluate
actions in terms of principles and we examine principles in the
light of their verdicts in particular cases. We assess candidate
principles by asking whether they can be derived from an overarching theory and we endorse or challenge theories because they
entail principles we avow or repudiate.
This ideal – of satisfaction that our mix of theory, principles and
judgements is in good order – has been dubbed ‘reﬂective equilibrium’ by John Rawls.6 In the real world of imperfect information
and variable judgement the picture breaks down. Reﬂective equilibrium will need to be created again and again as uncomfortable
facts and the disturbing implications of our theories and principles

11

INTRODUCTION

are revealed to us. It is not surprising, given this conception of the
task of ethics, that the subject has a long history and an assured
future. Our contribution to this endeavour will be to display as
comprehensive an equilibrium as can be attained in our reﬂections
about politics.
We have sounded an optimistic note with the promise of reconciliation through the search for a reﬂective equilibrium. I want to
continue in the spirit of optimism. Something akin to reﬂective
equilibrium must be sought in reconciliation of the dispute
between the individualist and the communitarian. My sketch of
these two positions has been a caricature, too brief, too tendentious, to carry conviction although it may illuminate central elements of the work of distinguished philosophers. This will become
evident as soon as we criticize these stereotypes. Against the communitarian we must insist that her account is vulnerable as soon
as it is seen to defend the indefensible. Take your favourite
example of an appalling practice with deep cultural and historical
roots, the apologists for which seem blind to the iniquity: slavery,
forced conversion, suttee, trial by combat, female circumcision,
ethnic cleansing; there is no shortage of candidates! We cannot
take the unreﬂective conviction of enthusiastic practioners, nor
any amount of detail showing how ﬁrmly such practices are
embedded in the belief- and value-structures of speciﬁc communities, to insulate them from criticism.7 At the very least, we can
attempt to show how far these traditions are based on false beliefs
where this is evident. So we should be very suspicious of claims to
the effect that subscription to moral principle or identiﬁcation
with institutions is somehow constitutive of the identity of potential villains. However deep their benighted views, they should be
regarded as ripe for change.
But equally, our contempt for cruelty and wickedness should not
convince us that we have attained the high ground of moral certainty. Some methodological modesty is in order. Individualism, as
I have characterized it, presupposes some conception of the wants
and values of typical individuals, once we discount the overambitious claim to algorithmic reason. Hobbes identiﬁed a universal
propensity to avoid death and live commodiously. Even so sparse a
conception of human nature as this offers a hostage to fortune.
John Locke took these ends to be universal, too, and then bolstered

12

INTRODUCTION

his account by claiming that mankind could not act as trustees of
the purposes God had ordained for them unless they were subject
to the law of nature and recognized to be free and equal possessors
of natural rights. These premises, too, are debatable. So just as
communities may disseminate error, individualists may advance
their critical positions on the basis of moral principles which can
prove hard to defend. If communities need to ﬁnd a place for
bloody-minded critics, critics should not be surprised at the
disclosure that their stance may be controversial and fallible.
As ever, some meeting of minds and temperaments must be
sought. And a model suggests itself. We are the heirs to many centuries of careful moral philosophy – philosophy which both derives
from and has contributed to a common social life structured by
rules and institutions. We inescapably think of ourselves in terms
of categories which carry moral potency. Thus we believe we are
committed to and responsible for the well-being of others as well
as ourselves. We insist on being respected as persons, as bearers of
rights which command the duties of others. We claim to be
autonomous and require a domain of personal freedom within
which this autonomy can be exercised. We refuse to recognize any
moral authority which can determine for us and dictate to us
where our duty lies. Nothing shall be demanded of us which in
principle is not available for us to endorse or reject.
At the same time, and equally inescapably, we ﬁnd ourselves living within communities of fabulous complexity, our lives
enmeshed with those with whom we associate in pursuit of
domestic, economic, artistic, scholarly, religious and political
ends. These pursuits, too, frame our severally rich conceptions of
what is valuable to us and how we may live well.
My picture of our moral repertoire, which I acknowledge I have
gathered from Hegel, is that of a structured cluster of principles of
the kind listed above which are expressed in institutions, amongst
which the law is dominant. We describe ourselves and recognize
others in all of these ways – and more besides. The core terms of
self-ascription have moral power in the simple sense that identiﬁcation with them requires us to act towards others (and others to
act towards ourselves) in ways consonant with the moral rules
which constitute these patterns of identiﬁcation. Thus to be a person, the most elementary of moral categories, is to claim respect

13

INTRODUCTION

for one’s rights as one respects the rights of others. To be a parent
is to have a duty of care to the children one has brought into the
world – and much else. To be a citizen is to be an active creator of
laws which demand the subjection of their creators. And so on . . .
I have stressed the complexity of this inheritance because this
very complexity establishes the philosopher’s itinerary. This is a
house which very much needs to be put in order. We have to think
through every element in it, elaborating the conception of the self
which is prompted and articulating the associated values. We need
to enquire whether this structure can hang together, whether we
can be all things at once, to ourselves and our fellows. It is likely
that we demand more of ourselves and others than can be accomplished, that roles and principles may clash and personal as well as
social conﬂicts erupt.
This is the conclusion I wish to draw from these brief reﬂections
on the methods of ethics and political philosophy. To advance in
ethics (and particularly in political philosophy) we do not need to
ﬁnd some foundational touchstone to establish the credentials
of all our beliefs at once – identifying this one as gold, that other
as dross. But nor need we endorse all that prereﬂectively we ﬁnd
ourselves approving. There is plenty of work for us to be getting on
with in describing, explaining, systematizing and inspecting for
contradictions the set of political values our history has gathered
together. We don’t need to closet ourselves away from the demands
of our communities – but neither should we assume that the moral
demands our communities press upon us are in good intellectual
order. A moderate scepticism, predicated upon suspicions of
confusion and incoherence, is quite enough to get us started.

Political philosophy
One could divide up the subject of political philosophy in any
number of ways, hoping that a systematic treatment will leave students with a solid grasp of the major areas of dispute. One could
begin with foundational theories, enquiring how far they generate
a set of principles which can be applied convincingly to a standard
list of philosophical problems which our political life throws up.
So one might study, in succession, say, utilitarianism, natural law

14

INTRODUCTION

and/or natural rights theory, Kantian autonomy-based theories,
contractualist theories and no-theory theories. (I have in mind
here that species of conservativism which argues that the political
domain of political philosophy, and perhaps ethics generally, is a
matter of practical wisdom and emphatically not susceptible to
systematic, rational theorizing.) And no doubt there are more
theories in the ofﬁng.
With our sights thus focused, we could investigate how well
these theoretical perspectives deliver the goods, asking, for
example: whether they can tell us whether we have good grounds
for accepting the state (and, in particular, its powers to coerce us
by threatening punishment) or whether we would do better
without it, in a condition of anarchy; what is the optimal
constitutional form of state authority (the rule of one: monarchy
or tyranny; a few: aristocracy or oligarchy; the many: democracy,
direct or representative; or some mix of these models); what is the
proper extent of political power: Is there a private domain which
can be invoked to limit the legitimate exercise of the states activities? Do these theories deliver an account of justice, telling us
who should own what, how beneﬁts should be allocated, which
burdens should be accepted as due?
Suppose we take it that these problems have given rise to a range
of clear answers prior to their theoretical exploration, we can then
order our investigations differently. We can state the problem in
appropriate detail, outline those answers which best encapsulate
our intuitions, and seek out a theory from which these results
could be derived.
In the chapters that follow, I shall use both of these approaches.
In Chapter 1, I shall discuss the utilitarian contribution to political philosophy. I select utilitarian theory for close investigation
for a number of reasons. First, because of its strength and the
detail with which it has been articulated. Amongst philosophers,
there may not be many card-carrying utilitarians nowadays, or not
many utilitarians who accept the theory in an unqualiﬁed fashion.
But utilitarianism has its classic sources in the work of Hume,
Bentham and J.S. Mill, and the core theory has been reﬁned and
developed by countless thinkers since. It has many variants, each
of which have developed responses to both sympathetic and relentlessly hostile criticism. As a body of normative theory it is

15

INTRODUCTION

unrivalled in its sophistication. Second, from its Benthamite origins, it has been applied resolutely in the domain of practical politics. Its key insistence on computing the beneﬁts and burdens of
all those who are affected by policy decisions has ensured its continued use by both politicians and those who criticize them.8 This
practical inﬂuence has also ensured that it has been the target of
those who dispute its credentials, both generally and in the context of speciﬁc policy application. In recent years, for example, it
has been heavily criticized for its role in debates concerning
environmental policy.9 Third, the criticism of utilitarian theory
has often been the starting point for those who have developed
alternative theoretical positions. In no case is this more conspicuous than that of John Rawls as he develops the argument of A
Theory of Justice. In which case, it is important that utilitarianism
should not be represented as a straw target; evaluation of these
competing theories requires that we understand the power and
plausibilty of utilitarianism at its strongest.
In the ﬁrst part of Chapter 2 I lay out the structure and main
variants of utilitarian theory, signalling the most important lines
of criticism and detailing the utilitarian responses to them. If you
wish to skip this exercise in moral philosophy and proceed directly
to speciﬁc problem areas in political philosophy, feel free to do so.
In the second part, I look more directly at the political elements of
utilitarian theory, detailing classical or typical utilitarian
accounts of the central political values – liberty, rights and justice
in the distribution of goods. In two ﬁnal sections, I examine brieﬂy
the utilitarian account of political obligation and the utilitarian
case for democracy.
In the three chapters that follow we shall investigate in greater
depth the philosophical credentials of these central critical ideals.
In Chapter 3, I examine the value of liberty. This will prove a
complex, not to say exhaustive, task since liberty is the most
opaque of values. Although I shall be focusing on the questions of
whether or not liberty is a value, and if so, why so, the literature
has bequeathed us a complex task of careful analysis, examining a
number of inﬂuential explications of the concept of liberty. We
shall discover that these open up rather than settle the questions
concerning value and that a complex account needs to be constructed. At the heart of this is a controversial claim that liberty

16

INTRODUCTION

as a political value can never require that citizens have the
opportunity to do evil. Having clariﬁed the conceptual background and stated why claims of liberty should be respected, I go
on to consider what liberty requires in the way of institutional
provision, how far the value of liberty supports democratic
decision-making processes and what principles should govern the
legitimate restraint of liberty by law and less formal social
mechanisms.
In Chapter 4, I tackle problems raised by the notion of rights.
Given the ubiquity of rights claims and the focus of political attention in both national and international contexts on human rights,
philosophical attention could not be more timely. As with liberty,
ﬁrst there is a thicket of analysis and terminological distinction to
be entered and much jargon to be clariﬁed. We are assisted here by
the work of jurisprudents who from Bentham onwards have been
scrupulous in the deﬁnition of terms – which is not to say that
their contributions are uncontroversial. We also look brieﬂy at the
question of group rights before tackling the vexed issue of the
justiﬁcation of rights claims. As citizens we are much better at
claiming rights than defending them.
In examining the credentials of rights claims we shall explore a
number of traditional approaches. Locke’s theological account is a
model, but the premisses from which it is advanced are claimed to
be too controversial to ﬁnd widespread acceptance. Arguments
from autonomy are more promising and, indeed successful over
some of the terrain of rights. But some rights, I claim, are more
evident than the justiﬁcatory apparatus proposed for them.
Others, notably the political rights, are claimed to be a species of
group rights for which support on the grounds of their promoting
personal autonomy is inapt. Next, we re-examine, in more detail
than hitherto, the utilitarian argument for rights. This, I maintain,
is more successful than many opponents allow. But to be wholly
satisfactory, utilitarian theory has to ﬁnd acceptance. It may not
be vulnerable to the charge that it cannot defend rights, but other
objections may be harder to rebut. Finally, I examine a littleknown view that I ﬁnd persuasive – the no-theory theory. On this
account, the success of appeals to rights lies in the fact that
history has taught us to claim them and recognize that claiming
them requires us to respect all persons as rights bearers.

17

INTRODUCTION

In Chapter 5 we shall broach the questions of distributive justice: how may private ownership be justiﬁed; which criteria should
we employ in order to decide who should own, or be allocated,
which beneﬁts and burdens? We begin with another commonsense, no-theory theory, the ‘entitlement’ theory of Robert Nozick.
Here we shall see that presenting no theory to justify property
distribution is a handicap rather than an advantage, since claims
to property will be challenged, in the name of justice, by nonowners and by the state which wishes to engage in the redistribution of wealth and earnings. The fundamental weakness of Nozick’s theory will be exposed: if private property is so important a
value that claims of right to it should be regarded as sacrosanct, to
the point that taxation amounts to forced labour, shouldn’t everyone have some of it? At this point, I shall discuss, too, F.A. Hayek’s
rejection of a value of social justice.
Assume that justice dictates that everyone should possess some
property. This signals the need to ﬁnd principles which determine
just allocations, and in what follows we discuss a number of traditional contenders. The ﬁrst principle to be assessed is that of
need. Like principles of liberty and rights, we shall ﬁnd that claims
of need require clariﬁcation by careful analysis and, job done,
command respect. Equality is a venerable (or disreputable) principle. Again clariﬁcation is demanded in order to answer the question: Equality of what? A range of candidate matrices of equality
will be reviewed. Desert is a familiar criterion of just distribution
– ‘Folks should get and keep what they have earned’ is an informal
way of expressing this principle. This view is examined, but in
large part rejected. Finally we look at one of the glories of
twentieth-century political philosophy – the theory of fairness
espoused in John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice. Rawls’s theory of
justices aims to solve more questions than who should own what,
who should be allocated which beneﬁts and burdens, but we shall
review it principally as an answer to those speciﬁc questions and
try to measure its contribution.
Chapter 6 tackles one of the great chestnuts of political philosophy – the problem of political obligation. The central issues
here concern the legitimacy of the commands of government, the
authority which government claims when it addresses laws to the
citizens. From the perspective of the citizen, the question will

18

INTRODUCTION

often be ‘Do I have an obligation or a duty to obey the law, comply
with the requests of the sovereign, or otherwise be a good citizen?’.
In the literature of political philosophy, this clutch of related
questions can be traced back to Socrates in his cell in Athens,
deliberating whether to accept the sentence of death or escape
with the assistance of his friends.
I put these questions in the voice of the state which makes
demands of its citizens, and after some preliminary sparring discuss two approaches which reject the enterprise of justifying the
authority of the state. The ﬁrst of these, anarchism, insists that
the state is an evil which cannot be justiﬁed; its use of coercive
powers is immoral and unnecessary. The second attempt to reject
the question comes from the communitarian who denies the citizen
any perspective from which the questions can be properly raised.
The authority of the state is beyond our critical reach.
Unfortunately neither of these sceptical approaches carry enough
conviction to disbar further investigation.
On any account of its powers, the state looks to be a nasty operation – this is the insight the anarchist just fails to exploit. And
might is not right. This sets up the ﬁrst and most obvious justiﬁcatory claim on the part of the state: however severe these powers
may be in their application to citizens, if the citizens consent to
the institutions which deploy them, the authority of the state is
conceded. This argument is irrefutable – which is not to say the
problem is solved, for it transpires that the phenomenon of consent
is more easily charged than witnessed. Some persons consent
expressly, some consent tacitly, but too many bloody-minded citizens can fairly repudiate the imputation of consent for these
arguments to serve the purpose of the state which aspires to universal allegiance. The best argument from consent is addressed to
citizens of a democracy who participate in the processes of making the decisions that bind them, but even this argument needs to
be massively qualiﬁed and even then will not convince all
dissenters.
Further arguments are needed by the state if it is to justify its
powers to coerce dissenters. A promising approach develops the
idea of hypothetical consent into a construction of a hypothetical
contract, the terms of which conclude, on the basis of premises
acceptable to all, that rational citizens ought to accept the

19

INTRODUCTION

authority of the state. Our judgement of this approach will be
inconclusive. Despite the workings of the great dead philosophers
– Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau – in this vein, a full modern statement of the case is necessary if it is to carry conviction. A related
argument is offered by H.L.A. Hart, the Principle of Fairness,
which claims that all who receive beneﬁts from the co-operative
efforts of others may be required to shoulder the burden of contributing towards the maintenance of the scheme that secures
them – the state. Is there such a rule or convention of fairness? If
there is does it govern the relationship of state to citizen? The
responses to these questions are not obvious. The most direct
answers exploit the notion of tacit consent which the principle
was designed to articulate or replace. Finally we examine the most
venerable of all arguments, the argument from gratitude. I shall
rescue this argument from the appearance of silliness which it
carries to the sceptical modern eye, but we shall see that the conditions required for its successful application impose severe limits
on the constitution and laws of the state which can be said to
deserve obedience by way of gratitude.
Finally, in Chapter 7, we broach the issue of the constitution
directly. In discussing liberty, we claim that democratic institutions procure a valuable kind of freedom. On any account of
human rights, the right of political participation will be central.
The question of political obligation is easier to tackle, if not
uniquely answerable, if the constitution is democratic. We bring
all these threads together in our discussion of the claims of
democracy. No wonder subscription to the values is just about
universal.
We rehearse these values and explain their role in justifying
democratic decision procedures through a presentation of Rousseau’s contribution to democratic theory, which is not to say we
are reciting uncontroversial truisms. His doctrine of the general
will has been thought by many to be too opaque a mystery to serve
as grounds for the legitimacy of democratic institutions, but we
note that the clear utilitarian alternative – maximize satisfaction
by implementing the desires of the majority – is deeply
unsatisfactory.
Rousseau’s arguments are directed to the justiﬁcation of direct
rather than representative democracy. For him, ‘representative

20

INTRODUCTION

democracy’ was an oxymoron; for us it may be a necessity as well as
an improvement on the model of direct plebiscitary decisionmaking. But then, we may not be true democrats either. If we are
not, if we recognize an imperative to draw in the horns of the
enthusiastic democrat, this may be because we acknowledge the
dangers of majority tyranny. Majority tyranny is as serious a problem as we are likely to confront in our lives as politically engaged
citizens – and it is philosophically puzzling, too. We shall try to
fathom the complexities.
Finally we discuss the claims of deliberative democracy to be the
only ethically permissible method of settling deep moral disagreements. We shall conclude that these claims, in reaching for an
ideal consensus, are overblown. There are good reasons for believing that substantial agreement concerning the issues put forward
for political settlement may be unreachable. Moral pluralism fosters intractable debate. Differences in deep moral values, often the
product of divergent religious beliefs, seem irresolvable. Agreement on a method of establishing policy, on reaching political
accommodation, is often the best we can hope for. Sadly, we have
no reason to believe that this best is good enough for the zealots of
dangerous causes. The democrat will have to use coercion to
defend his use of the ballot box.

21

Chapter 2

Utilitarianism

A good way to begin is by studying a deep and well-worked-out
ethical theory which has commanded wide assent, reached clear
conclusions when tackling the philosophical problems thrown up
by our political life and produced unambiguous policy directives to
settle practical questions. I select utilitarianism because I believe
it has these features (or, at least, makes these claims). This has
been recognized by many of the most impressive recent contributors to political philosophy. Few endorse utilitarianism – but most
of them see the need to deﬁne their position against the utilitarian
salient.1 Utilitarianism should not be treated as a straw target; it
has two great virtues which we should not lose sight of. First, it is
based on a thought that ought to have universal appeal: when
judging conduct, we should pay close attention to the consequences of human actions in respect of their contribution to the
welfare of all those whom the actions affect. Second, (and this was
a central preoccupation of the classical utilitarian thinkers,
Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill) that focus is particularly
apt for ﬁxing the purposes of government. We would do well to

23

UTILITARIANISM

recapture the revolutionary impact of the claim that government,
in particular, is in business to promote the well-being and reduce
the suffering of all of its subjects.2

The foundations of utilitarianism
But ﬁrst things ﬁrst. Let me give a summary of the main elements
of utilitarian theory, beginning with the simplest formulation of
the principle of utility:
Right actions maximize well-being.
This statement can be elaborated in many different ways, although
it is worth mentioning now that the most familiar version of the
principle, invoking the greatest happiness of the greatest number,
should have been abandoned long ago. Recent commentators3 have
pointed out that a principle which requires the maximization of
two independent variables will be indecisive over a signiﬁcant
range of cases. To use Evans’s example, trying to rank outcomes in
accordance with the greatest happiness of the greatest number is
like offering a prize to the person running the furthest distance in
the shortest time! Bentham, who ﬁrst brought the phrase ‘the
greatest happiness of the greatest number’ to prominence, used it
as a kind of standing reminder that everyone affected by policies
were to be counted and as a slogan redolent of democratic sentiments, but even he recognized that it was faulty in suggesting that
the happiness of the majority only, the greatest number, should be
counted. He saw that careless use of the principle in this formulation quickly leads the critic to charge that the utilitarian is prone
to ignore the rights of minorities and to countenance other
injustices so long as a majority is suited.4 As we shall see, these
questions cannot be settled quite as quickly as a faulty grasp of the
principle suggests. For now let us just repeat that everyone’s interests are to count equally in the calculations. As Bentham insisted
and Mill repeated: ‘Everybody to count for one, nobody for more
than one.’5

24

UTILITARIANISM

Formal theory
Acts, rules and dispositions
There are two main elements to the utilitarian approach which
need to be distinguished and reviewed separately – formal theory
and value theory.6 Formally, utilitarianism is a consequentialist
theory. It requires that we compare alternative outcomes in point
of their consequences, asking which realizes the maximum
amount of some good. Which good is to be maximized is a matter
for value theory and we shall examine candidate goods later. An
important ﬁrst question, then, which my account so far has
concealed, concerns what it is of which we are to review the consequences. Three answers may be distinguished – and it is an
important issue whether or not, or to what degree, they may be
combined.
In the ﬁrst place, and most obviously, we may review directly the
consequences of alternative actions. The thought here is straightforward: we propose to evaluate the rightness or wrongness of
actions by determining what the consequences of actions have
been or by projecting what the consequences will be.7 This position
is often referred to as act utilitarianism. A second proposal is different. The rightness or wrongness of actions should be reckoned
indirectly in terms of whether or not they are in accordance with
moral rules; this is the basis of the rule utilitarian programme, the
main burden of which will be the assessment of alternative rules
(and systems of rules) to determine which rules will promote the
best consequences. A different, and perhaps complementary, variety of indirect utilitarianism proposes that we evaluate actions in
terms of the motives, dispositions or traits of character they
exemplify, for example, praising a person who is honest or criticizing one who is mean. In this case the utilitarian will consider
which qualities of character are likely to induce those who exhibit
them to act in ways that lead to the maximization of well-being.
This is evidently an important question for any moral theory
which proposes to address issues concerning the formation of
character in processes of moral education. And we would do well
to remember that John Stuart Mill believed these issues were
central to the utilitarian agenda.

25

UTILITARIANISM

So, we can be act or direct utilitarians, or indirect utilitarians
investigating the tendencies of rules or dispositions of character.
This way of putting matters suggests that these are alternative
routes for the utilitarian to follow, whereas the correct position
may be different. Note ﬁrst of all, that there is no reason in principle why each of these subjects, actions, rules and dispositions,
may not be susceptible to utilitarian review. We can examine separately the consequences of actions taken individually, of adopting and maintaining rules of conduct, of producing and promoting
dispositions to act in various ways. In fact, any version of utilitarianism worth its salt will need to be able to appraise actions and
agents in each of these ways. There will be problems for the utilitarian only if we have reason to think that assessment along these
different dimensions will yield contradictions or dilemmas.
Unfortunately there is reason to think that it might.
There are good utilitarian reasons for societies to introduce and
stick to rules of property, determining who owns what, who may
use what and much else. Conﬂicting claims are reduced, the possibility of co-operation is enhanced. Suppose we have in place a set
of rules which will promote the best consequences for everyone if
they are generally accepted. They include the familiar commandment: Do not steal. Suppose Sally needs to steal a few potatoes
from Robert’s ﬁeld if she and her children are to survive. Robert,
we might assume to make the case stronger, has plenty of potatoes
to spare; he does not in fact notice the theft – and nor does anyone
else. Sally, now well fed, ﬁnds work and can support her children.
She is never tempted to steal again. Did she do right or did she do
wrong? To the rule utilitarian she did wrong. The rule in play
prohibits stealing and Sally broke it. The act utilitarian will judge
differently. The gain to Sally and her children is evident. Robert’s
loss is negligible. More good has been achieved by the theft than by
the family’s starvation. We should conclude that act and rule
utilitarianism reach different verdicts in this particular case.
The same conﬂict of views can be reproduced in cases involving
act and disposition utilitarianism. Let us agree that a society
which succeeds in creating compassionate and sympathetic dispositions in its members will better promote well-being than one
which does not.8 Carol gives money to a street collector who uses it
to buy arms for a terrorist group. She was credulous in believing

26

UTILITARIANISM

the money would be used to help wives and families in need of
support and so contributes to the success of a damaging terrorist
campaign. Since dispositions as deep as that inculcated in Carol
cannot be switched on and off, her compassion as much as her
credulity renders her vulnerable to evil solicitations. The disposition utilitarian will commend her display of compassion. The
act utilitarian will say she did wrong if her act resulted in a great
deal of suffering. Likewise, in cases where my compassion for
others causes me to steal in order to prevent their starvation, the
demands of disposition utilitarianism seem to conﬂict with a
utilitarianism of rules.
Does this succession of cases reduce utilitarianism to incoherence – simultaneously condemning and endorsing actions from
conﬂicting stances of judgement? Perhaps not, if we accept the
main lines of the following characteristic utilitarian response.
What is the chief impetus behind our insistence that we should
take into account the utility of rules and dispositions as well as,
directly, the utility of acts? It is this thought: it is fantasy to suppose that the moral agent can be forever computing the respective
utilities of all prospective acts in order to judge which is best. We
haven’t the time, we haven’t the patience and, perhaps most
important, we haven’t the knowledge necessary to reach correct
verdicts on what future consequences will follow a host of alternative interventions. This point may seem devastating to the act
utilitarian but he has a swift response – which is to insist that if we
take into account the utility of deliberating over what we should
do we shall soon see that short-cuts are necessary. Why should the
sailor start working out when high tide will be at Greenock tomorrow on the basis of what it was on a speciﬁc day last month if he
can look it up in the Glasgow Herald or the Nautical Almanac?9
Clearly we need some analogue of the tide-tables in morality and
moral rules give us one. Instead of working our own way through
the likely consequences of our actions, why not refer to a set of
rules which provides accurate guidance?
If fallibility and the cost of calculation suggest an important
place for rules, they also accord considerable weight to the cultivation of character. Some people do mental arithmetic well – and this
disposition can be cultivated – but no one except Jeremy Bentham
has suggested that the skills of utilitarian calculation ought to be

27

UTILITARIANISM

widely developed.10 But many utilitarians (and John Stuart Mill
conspicuously) have accepted the importance of inculcating
strong dispositions, believing that spontaneous and unreﬂective
responses of generosity and honesty will more than compensate
for our defects as calculators.
For the act utilitarian, then, rules and dispositions of character,
far from comprising alternative dimensions of utilitarian assessment, must be employed in a practical and reliable calculus.
Ultimately, of course, the only measure of right action is the goodness of the consequences of actions but this is not a measure that
needs to be taken if we have to hand the right set of rules and a
population with correct dispositions.
This account is plausible – but how does it help us tackle the
problem caused by the examples of conﬂict given above? It suggests
that we have to understand clearly the relation between actions on
the one hand and rules and dispositions of character on the other.
Let us begin with rules.11 Thus far I have been referring to rules
as though these are simple phenomena with which we are well
acquainted. In fact there are at least three different conceptions of
rules in play.
The ﬁrst sort of rule is the ‘ideal’ rule – a technical device
unique to utilitarianism. We introduce ideal rules when we claim
that actions are right if they are in accordance with those rules
which would promote most good, were they to be generally complied with.12 Ideal rule utilitarianism has been effectively criticized.13 A ﬁrst difﬁculty is this: Suppose our car is stuck just below
the top of the last hill before we reach our destination. The rule for
all ﬁve passengers to follow is clearly, ‘Push’, if pushing will see
them over the summit and into a comfortable bed. Four passengers
either don’t work this out or don’t follow the rule. If ideal rule
utilitarianism were the best decision procedure to follow, the ﬁfth
passenger should push even if her solitary efforts will prove ineffective. This is clearly irrational. And it doesn’t look like a utilitarian stategy either, since no beneﬁts would accrue and the diligent
rule follower will suffer for her efforts.
A second difﬁculty follows. Alter the scenario so that only the
pushing of four passengers is needed to get the car over the summit. Why should the ﬁfth passenger push? Isn’t utility maximized
if the ﬁfth passenger loiters alongside rather than lending her

28

UTILITARIANISM

shoulder to the task? Again ideal rule utilitarianism suggests that
not pushing would be wrong, although it is hard to see how her
unnecessary expenditure of effort could maximize utility. (I accept
that other things might be wrong with her not pushing. Perhaps it
is unfair of her not to shoulder her share of the burden. But now it
looks as though fairness conﬂicts with utility.) The central point
of both these examples is that real utilitarians would not stick to
ideal rules if the circumstances dictate that utility is best
advanced by breaking them. In J.J.C. Smart’s terms, either one is a
utilitarian or a rule worshipper – one can’t be both.14
The second conception of rules identiﬁes them as useful rules of
thumb. A better example here than Mill’s Nautical Almanac
(which we should treat as infallible!) is a rule for hillwalkers such
as ‘If you cannot see the point to which you are heading, take a
compass bearing and follow it’. Accepting such a rule will lead you
to take a map and compass on your walk and generally help you to
escape difﬁculties in route ﬁnding. But it is important to recognize
that the rule should not be followed slavishly. It should be quickly
broken if the bearing takes you to the top of a cliff. And if
the compass veers erratically when you seem to be walking in
a straight line, you should consider whether there might be
magnetic rocks in the vicinity.
Are moral rules like this? There is good reason to think that they
are. ‘Keep promises’, we say, but we recognize lots of cases where
exceptions may properly be made. Sometimes we cite a speciﬁc
qualiﬁcation to the rule which suggests that the rule is more complex than the original simple formulation. We can add a clause: ‘. . .
unless the promise has been extorted.’ We can gather together
exceptions, as when we say: ‘. . . unless disproportionate harm will
be caused to some third party.’ Or we can make exceptions on a
case by case basis whenever exigencies seem to require the breaking of the promise. When these things happen, the utilitarian says
we are justiﬁed if we can maximize well-being by breaking the
rule.
It has been argued, successfully I think, that this rules-of-thumb
variety of rule utilitarianism reduces to act utilitarianism since
the bottom line in each of these calculations is that the right
action is the one that maximizes utility. We can expect rules which
we employ in the face of uncertainty to develop the force of

29

UTILITARIANISM

inhibitions. We may be taught them in the secure expectation that
they will develop this motivational power. But whatever the motivational push or pull exhibited by the rules we endorse, we should
not expect them to be either immune to revision or privileged
against exception wherever utility dictates. The utilitarian claims,
with some justiﬁcation, that the effects of spontaneous good
judgement are so positive that we should be reluctant to break
rules without compunction; the purposes served by having rules in
the ﬁrst place will not be easily subverted if the rules are strongly
internalized. Thus although this variety of rule utilitarianism is
consistent with (because it is reducible to) act utilitarianism,
there remain strong reasons for supporting the induction of moral
rules like ‘Keep promises’ in the consciousness of agents – just as
there are strong reasons for getting walkers to make a habit of
using a map and compass.
There is a third conception of rules which is of particular
importance in political philosophy. This is the category of rules
which are constitutive of institutions. Many of these rules will
have the force of law and will be backed by legal sanctions
although there are non-legal rules and non-legal sanctions. We can
expect most societies to have an institution of private property.
Such an institution is best understood in terms of an interrelated
set of rules establishing rights, duties, powers and privileges. The
core rules will be expressed in law, such as prohibitions against
theft. But there will be associated non-legal or non-enforceable
rules, too. ‘Do not write in books that you borrow from friends’ is
one which I expect most readers to accept. Other institutions
which comprise a mix of legal and non-legal rules include marriage and family life, arrangements for treating the sick and educating the young, and of course the political life of the community.
The ‘ontology’ of such institutions is complex and is not usefully
clariﬁed by the modern fad for issuing mission statements. I take
an idealist view. Institutions as I describe them consist in rules
which command the behaviour of members, rules with respect to
which one may take an internal or external point of view. Internally, members (insiders) identify with institutions whose rules they
recognize as valid. The external perspective is taken by observers
(outsiders) who describe institutions on the basis of members’
conduct. Of course, the same person may be both insider and

30

UTILITARIANISM

outsider; these terms describe roles or perspectives and so all
depends on the stance from which he is describing or evaluating
the rules in question.15
Institutional rules differ from rules of thumb in two signiﬁcant
ways. In the ﬁrst place, they will be justiﬁed as necessary for the
effective functioning of the institution, serving as means to given
ends. This is an oversimple way of describing a matter of great
conceptual delicacy since it supposes that the purposes of institutions may be identiﬁed independently of the structure of rules
which constitute them. But my point is this: suppose we recognize
as one of the purposes of family life (or of alternative patterns of
domesticity) the provision of a healthy and supportive environment for children. We shall then justify rules, both legal and
non-legal, in terms of their conduciveness to this purpose.
Now remember that for the moment we are utilitarians. We have
institutions characterized by rules which promote whatever purposes the institutions serve. It follows that we do not evaluate
institutional rules one by one and directly, in terms of their several
contributions towards utility. It will be the institution as a whole
which is appraised. The utilitarian will tackle ﬁrst the grand questions, for example: Should children be brought up in a nuclear
family, an extended family or in a kibbutz? Having assessed the
respective utilities of these different domestic arrangements, we
can then go on to ﬁx e.g. the rules for appropriate income tax
allowances or whichever means we employ to support what we have
concluded is the optimal domestic unit. Institutional rules differ
from rules of thumb in that the primary focus of justiﬁcation is the
institution rather than the rule.
The second major difference is equally important. This concerns
the justiﬁcation of particular actions. Assume that we have in
place a system for the regulation of private property which
includes rules governing inheritance and bequest. My family are
hard up. Am I morally justiﬁed in forging alterations to Donald’s
will so that his estate will give my family the security they deserve
rather than support the drug addiction of Donald’s intended
beneﬁciary?
If the rules governing bequests were rules of thumb, immediately the question would be open: What does utility dictate in these
circumstances? Matters are very different when we are thinking of

31

UTILITARIANISM

institutional rules and it is important to work out just why this is
so. Here is one immediate difference. In the case of rules of thumb,
the rules have standing in the deliberations of the moral agent as
ready reckoners which obviate the need for hard, often fallible,
calculation – but where circumstances scream out for judgement
outside the normal response of compliance, direct calculation of
the appropriate utilities can be the only rational response. In the
case of institutional rules, these have an authority quite
independent of their service as guides to conduct for the unsure or
hard-pressed. They are not open to scrutiny except as elements of
institutions which ﬁnd their justiﬁcations in terms of their operation as a whole. One may certainly question an institution,
demanding whether or not it promotes utility. But if it does then
the institution becomes entrenched, acquiring a social reality
which cannot be dissolved by the exercise of deliberation. Similarly, one may seek to alter the institutional rules. Maybe different,
better, rules will serve the institution more effectively. And this
kind of tinkering goes on all the time, conspicuously in legislative
activity. But suppose an institution promotes utility in the way its
defenders claim and suppose the rules of the institution effectively
secure this. If the utilitarian accepts these claims, it is not open to
him to violate the rules in order to promote utility. If two people
decide the most worthwhile way to spend their time is by playing
chess, so long as the game is proceeding it is not open to one of
them to cheat on the grounds that both of them will better enjoy
subsequent play. It might indeed be true that it will make for a
better game if the rules are changed, and this may prompt them to
change the rules, giving a handicap to one of the players. But as
the rules stand at the beginning of the game, cheating cannot be
vindicated by rule changes it may be sensible to introduce later.
The cost of subscribing to institutions which promote utility is
that one sacriﬁces the opportunity of breaking rules on occasions
which suggest that rule breaking promises utilitarian gains.
So, if I am caught out in my forgery of Donald’s will, I should not
expect the ofﬁcials of the legal system to listen carefully to my
utilitarian defence. They will follow the rules which utility has
dictated should be followed in all cases. There is no great utilitarian ombudsman prepared to review all instances of individuals
claiming they broke the rules in the service of some overriding

32

UTILITARIANISM

utilitarian purpose. Nor should this kind of pleading persuade us
that one should be installed. Readers can work out for themselves
the disutility of introducing such an institutional role!
This is not to say that in emergencies, in cases of disaster or
catastrophe, the rules of institutions should not be broken. You
may justiﬁably break the speed limit driving a badly injured person
to hospital. But then you should not expect to get punished either,
since an institution which is justiﬁable and maximally effective
will make provision for such cases by, for example, specifying
allowable defences against the charge of wrong-doing. If such
defences are not in place, then the rules of the institution should
be altered to permit them. Contrast this with the rule of thumb
about following compass bearings. We don’t alter or amend the
rule when we ﬁnd ourselves at the top of the cliff. We disregard it
until we have circumvented the obstacle – and we pick it up later.
We are not in the business of formulating optimal rules of thumb
with guidance for each contingency; such rules would quickly
become unwieldy and just as difﬁcult to apply as pristine act utilitarianism. But we are in the business of designing and sustaining
optimal institutions and there is something desperately wrong
with institutions which cannot be remedied in the face of conspicuous disutility. Commanding ofﬁcers, we are told, may decorate soldiers for bravery – then punish them, if their heroism
involved disobeying orders. ‘Change the rules’, the utilitarian
should insist.
Let us conclude, for the moment, that the utilitarian can endorse
two different conceptions of rules: rules of thumb which pre-empt
arduous and uncertain calculation and institutional rules which
promote utility through the dynamics of some complex system. So
rules have a place (or better, two) in utilitarian judgement. Can
similar arguments be used to sort out the possible conﬂict between
the utility of actions and the utility of dispositions?
I suspect that they can. It makes sense to cultivate in ourselves
and others qualities of character which reduce the possibility of
conﬂict and enhance the prospect of fruitful co-operation. It
makes sense to subdue or eliminate tendencies which generate
conﬂict or render it endemic. As utilitarian strategies these look
eminently respectable – always supposing that conﬂict promotes
suffering and co-operation increases well-being. Each of us can

33

UTILITARIANISM

draw up our own list of favourite and suspect personal qualities.
High on my list of admirable qualities, being in Nietzschean terms
a typical modern wimp, would be compassion and sympathy, courtesy to strangers (especially beggars), tolerance and good humour.
One of the nice things about speaking of ‘dispositions’ in this
context is the implication that there are no iron laws dictating
rigid uniformities of response. Utility may determine that widespread good temper and equanimity may limit occasions of conﬂict, but the right thing to do in particular circumstances, again
judged in terms of utility, may well be to erupt with rage. Once
more, the utilitarian should recommend the cultivation of dispositions to counter the rigours and difﬁculties of judgement. Common sense tells us that those with a generous temperament are a
social asset – but it also tells us that generous responses should be
restrained if circumstances suggest that those who look to be in
need of assistance would really be better off learning to cope with
this kind of difﬁculty by themselves. In the case of rules of thumb
we saw how rules could be of general use even though their application could not be justiﬁed in conspicuous cases where utilitarian calculation suggests otherwise. In the case of the utility of
dispositions, the whiff of contradiction is more easily dispelled
since we have no tendency to think of qualities of character as
rigid determinants of action.
One interesting question remains. I suggested in respect of institutional rules that these do have an authority which deﬁes the
application of utilitarian calculation to particular opportunities
for utility promotion. Is there any analogue with respect to qualities of character? I suspect that there may be. The category of
institutions as I have employed it has been very wide,16 comprising
almost any congeries of rules, although I have suggested they will
have some structure dictated by function or purpose. In fact, I
doubt whether any institution can have the ethical force sufﬁcient
to motivate members or subscribers to develop the ‘internal’ point
of view with respect to its rules, if it does not cultivate as qualities
of character distinctive and appropriate styles of emotional
response. There is something bloodless (and plain wrong) about
any analysis of domestic relationships which focuses on rules and
concomitant rights and duties as the essence. Capacities for love
and affection should be in the foreground.17 In which case, the

34

UTILITARIANISM

utilitarian claim that speciﬁc institutions are conducive to general
utility will require that participants display the appropriate emotional qualities – and we should recognize the force these may
exert on individuals who exhibit them. Who knows . . . there may
be occasions when in deﬁance of these institutions and their
internally necessary sentiments, general utility requires the sacriﬁce of one’s ﬁrst-born son; unlike God, the utilitarian should not
then expect obedience.
Aggregate and maximum average utility
A futher question in formal utilitarian theory concerns the matter
of whether we are to maximize aggregate or average utility. For
most purposes, computation in terms of aggregate or maximum
average utility will give an identical ordering of different outcomes. If Policy A produces 100 units of utility and Policy B produces 50 units, Policy A is better on aggregate. If both policies
affect the same number of people or apply over the same population, say 50 persons, A will again be better than B because the
average of two units per person is greater than the average of one.
So long as the number of persons over whom the average is taken is
constant between the alternative outcomes, no issue of principle is
raised.18
But this condition will not always hold good. We can all think of
policies concerning housing, medicine, pollution control, trafﬁc
management even, which themselves determine, in part, the number of people affected by the policy. The possibility of population
control, government action which is directed towards increasing
or, more likely nowadays, decreasing the size of the population of a
country, is a particularly obvious example of policy which gives
rise to a new theoretical problem for the utilitarian.
Suppose two policies C and D effect the same aggregate utility –
100 units. Should we prefer policy C which distributes these units
between 50 people (an average utility of two units per person) or
policy D which leads to a doubling of the population and which
then distributes the 100 units between 100 people (an average of
one unit per person)? In point of aggregate utility the totals are
the same; in point of maximum average utility the results are very

35

UTILITARIANISM

different – C is superior to D. Whether the units measure resources
or states of mind like happiness, it looks as though we should
judge that policy C will make us better off. The cake is divided
amongst fewer people. Children work out this principle at a very
early age – just as soon as they ﬁnd that times are harder with
every addition to the family. With no more detail to go on, our
intuitions favour Policy C.
But we should ask, if we strongly favour being amongst the
lucky few, where are the missing 50 people? Do we have nothing to
say about them? Have they no claim on us? These questions may
strike you as silly, but there is a point to them. We do hypothesize
such ‘missing persons’ and consider how policies will impact on
them when we think through the consequences of what we do for
future generations. I can start thinking now of saving for my
grandchildren’s education. I don’t have any grandchildren at the
moment and may never turn out to have any, but the idea of planning for these hypothetical descendants is not ridiculous. I must
plan for my retirement, or so my independent ﬁnancial adviser
instructs, yet he knows no better than I whether I shall live to
enjoy it. It makes sense to think of and plan for persons who do not
now exist and may never do so, just as it does for persons who now
exist but may turn out not to do so when the plans come to fruition.
So, if our choice of policy determines that 50 people who don’t
presently exist will never do so, shouldn’t we consider the consequences of what we do for them, what we have deprived them of
or spared them from? If we select Policy C rather than Policy D
haven’t we denied them the prospect of a life with a positive sum of
well-being? And maybe there is a Policy E in the ofﬁng which
promises 150 units of utility spread between 120 beneﬁciaries. In
this case there is a clear gain in terms of aggregate utility. Isn’t
this the best thing to do? This intuition conﬂicts strongly with the
claim that the only thing that matters is maximum average utility. I
shall leave this tricky problem unresolved. In what follows I shall
be supposing that it is average utility that we are seeking to
maximize – but you should note my reservations.

36

UTILITARIANISM

Maximization
One ﬁnal assumption needs to be openly displayed and this is concealed in the unexamined use of the term ‘maximization’. The
standard utilitarian picture is that of agents, in their personal
capacity or as policy-makers, charting the consequences of actions
and then listing the positive and negative effects as these impact
upon individuals. We ‘maximize’ utility by selecting that policy or
action, amongst a range of alternatives, which promotes the greatest net utility – and the implication is that we decide on the best
option by adding the utility scores in respect of each person
affected to produce a sum of utility points represented by a cardinal number for each alternative outcome. Something like this
practice was implicit in my discussion of the comparative outcomes in respect of aggregate and maximum average utility in the
paragraphs above.
The questions begged by this construal of maximization as addition are many and deep and I cannot begin to explore all their
ramiﬁcations – but here are a few.19 Are the good (and evil) consequences of action susceptible of measurement at all? Can the
consequences for one person be tallied as the sum of the varieties
of ways in which persons may be affected? Suppose a policy both
diminishes my liberty and improves my health. On what scale can
these different effects ﬁnd a common measure? If we agree that
individuals may be able (somehow) to answer these questions for
themselves, how are different individual responses to be compared
and then registered in a common scale? To employ the familiar
jargon, how are interpersonal comparisons and measurement of
utility possible? Two things are absolutely clear: ﬁrst, that a common denominator amongst a range of goods that will permit the
arithmetical operations of addition and subtraction (as well as
multiplication and division as soon as probabilities enter the calculations) will be very hard, if not impossible, to ﬁnd; the utilitarian, for all Bentham’s talk of a ‘feliciﬁc calculus’, may well have to
manage with instruments of calculation which do not permit the
operation of arithmetical functions. Second, just what is possible
in both individual and interpersonal cases will depend upon the
description of the goods in question – and so it is to utilitarian
value theory that I now turn.

37

UTILITARIANISM

Value theory
Utilitarian value theory tells us what to look for when we assess
actions, rules or dispositions in the light of their consequences. It
tells us what it is that we are measuring when we set out to compare alternative actions or states of affairs and judge which is best.
Thus far, I have described the good to be assessed as utility (the
weakest formulation), well-being or welfare. I have been supposing
that we have a rough idea of what these terms connote, but in truth
I have been issuing blank cheques, trusting the reader to ﬁll in the
value in a plausible fashion. It is an open question whether the
utilitarian has the philosophical assets to redeem them. In this
brief survey of different accounts of the value to be maximized I
shall highlight issues which have a bearing on the agenda of the
political philosopher (although the prime concern of the utilitarian who wishes to contribute to debates in political philosophy
will be to give the correct account of value!).
Hedonism
The classical utilitarians, Bentham and John Stuart Mill, thought
of value, the human good or the good of sentient creatures, as
happiness and explained happiness as pleasure and the absence of
pain. This identiﬁcation of the good with happiness is the doctrine
of hedonism. For Bentham and Mill it was an empirical claim
about human nature that human beings desire happiness – and
Mill went so far as to claim that, at bottom, happiness is the only
thing they desire.20 Mill’s strategy in this proof has two elements:
happiness is a good, he claims, because everyone desires it, and
happiness is the only good because any alternative candidate
good can be seen to be either a means to happiness or a part (or
ingredient) of it.
Mill’s arguments are not easy to evaluate. It is clearly a hedonist
position; what is hard to see is whether Mill has successfully disengaged himself from the egoism of Bentham, as he believed. He
thought it obviously true that agents desire the happiness of
others. They may be kind, helpful, generous and compassionate –
and the sensible utilitarian will acquire dispositions of these sorts

38

UTILITARIANISM

and encourage them in others. And having dispositions of these
sorts may cause their bearers to act in ways that reduce or sacriﬁce
their own happiness. Mill must insist, at this stage in his proof,
that these qualities of character, which we may call virtues, following his account, must be, in some sense, elements of the agent’s
own happiness. Their life must be going better for the exhibition of
them. The virtuous person must be frustrated and diminished if no
opportunities arise to be virtuous, since their virtue is a part of
their happiness. Minimally we must suppose that the virtuous person enjoys the exercise of virtue, but if we are to steer clear of
egoism (and retain some sense that the agent is acting truly virtuously) we must detach the enjoyment from the motivation of the
agent.
In fact, this is quite easy to do. I guarantee (unless the circumstances are somehow peculiar) that you will gain pleasure, sometimes great pleasure, from acting virtuously. Many recipes for
attaining pleasure are unsound given the ways human beings differ. The sources of pleasure are a matter of self-discovery rather
than expert tuition. Nonetheless, the satisfaction of having done
something worthwhile is as universal a phenomenon as any that
may be attested in this area. And yet it is clear that those who
achieve it do not act in order to gain it. It is not a satisfaction that
can be actively sought, a sensation that one can pursue with forethought and diligence – and without hypocrisy. It is a very special
kind of moral creep (a kind I have not encountered in either real
life or ﬁction) that will react with pleasure at the prospect of
someone desperately in need of assistance. ‘Oh good!’ such a one
might exclaim, ‘another opportunity to gain that unique kind of
satisfaction which I experience when helping others!’ I hesitate to
generalize over the peculiar sphere of human motivation, but I
don’t see how the sense that one has acted virtuously can co-exist
with the knowledge that one has sought and attained a kind of
personal pleasure which one prizes. The fact is that although the
feeling of pleasure is just about universally consequent upon the
genuine exercise of virtuous sentiments, the actions themselves
will not be motivated by the prospect of attaining it.
Mill knew this very well. But if it is true, what remains of his
claim that actions performed by agents who desire to act virtuously are explained by or exemplify the desire for happiness? Of

39

UTILITARIANISM

course virtue can contribute to happiness – I have argued that it
always will in the sense of producing in the agent an invariable
sense of satisfaction in having acted well – but this is not the same
as claiming that virtue is a part or ingredient of happiness. (Cheerfulness and a feeling of content that one’s life is going well: these
are the sorts of states of mind that can be recognized as ingredients of happiness.) I conclude that the virtues only contribute to
our happiness when it is not our happiness that we seek by their
exercise, and hence that acting virtuously is something that we
desire independently of the prospects for our happiness, however
good these prospects might be as a result. If this is accepted, it
follows that happiness is not the only good we seek. We also
recognize the good of a virtuous life.
We now have two distinct goods – happiness and the pursuit of a
virtuous life. Perhaps there are more. The standard way of developing a list of distinct goods is to give examples of conﬂict. A famous
example, discussed by Grifﬁn,21 is that of Freud who was prepared
to suffer a great deal of pain during his terminal illness in order to
continue being able to think clearly. So one could claim on this
basis that knowledge of one’s affairs and one’s surroundings is a
good independent of the absence of pain. Amend the example
slightly and we can describe cases where a suffering patient is
prepared to undergo great pain in order to retain control over
those aspects of her life which she judges to be important. This
will introduce a separate value of autonomy.22 A slightly different
patient may undergo great suffering in order to accomplish some
task which has been central to her aspirations – designing a house,
planting a forest or writing a book. And we may applaud those who
risk their lives climbing mountains, diving caves, undertaking
arduous sea voyages – all in the grip of ambitions which cannot be
described as the pursuit of pleasure. So it looks as though a sense
of achievement is a characteristic human good. Health, too, is distinct from pleasure (and these other goods). I may sacriﬁce my
health in the pursuit of pleasure – and give up pleasurable activities if these threaten my health. I may risk my eye-sight painting
miniatures and keep up skiing at the cost of further damage to my
knees. The list of distinctive human goods throws up dilemmas at
every turn.
In the face of these difﬁculties the utilitarian may continue to

40

UTILITARIANISM

insist on hedonism, but it is quite clear that he can do so only by
continuing to insist that all of these separate goods are desired as
the means to happiness or as constitutive of it – parts or ingredients, in Mill’s terms. I suspect however that whatever cogency the
argument can gather is achieved by stipulation because our concept of happiness is so ragged. Deﬁned as pleasure and the absence
of pain, the concept is operational but, as I suggested above, we are
forced to recognize other conﬂicting goods. If we are to include
these competing goods in the account we give of happiness, then
happiness becomes little more than a cipher, collecting together
all of the distinctive objects of human desire. What threatens, of
course, is incoherence since happiness is no longer a value in
terms of which we can appraise alternative outcomes which
promote happiness along these different dimensions. We have lost
the sense of happiness as a common denominator which can be
employed in the calculation of what is the best thing to do.
Desire-satisfaction
The utilitarian is still not without resort. He can claim, still with
an eye on Mill’s proof, that we have overlooked one important unifying feature, that these goods are each of them the objects of
characteristic human desires. In which case, why not identify the
satisfaction of desire as the distinctive good to be employed in
evaluating outcomes?
To many this has seemed a very attractive proposal. Desires (or
preferences) are revealed in human actions. Our actions serve as
the mark of their strength; indeed the prices of goods, determined
by how much we are prepared to pay, may quantify their intensity
and register the degree of our satisfaction. At this point ethics and
political philosophy join hands with economics and all the powerful mathematical tools of that discipline are liberated for application outside the conventional boundaries of the dismal science. No
longer will we have to pretend to be ‘weighing’ the pleasures and
pains in prospect as though these could be put on the scales with
fruit and vegetables. Welfare economics is at the disposal of the
consumer with a spreadsheet who wishes to take a voyage of
self-discovery, as well as being the resource of the policy-maker

41

UTILITARIANISM

concerned to implement those policies which maximally suit those
affected by them. Bentham’s antiquated apparatus of the ‘feliciﬁc
calculus’, computing the intensity, duration, propinquity, fecundity, etc. of pleasures and pains can be consigned to the same
museum of primitive scientiﬁc instruments which houses the ﬁrst
slide-rule.
It is difﬁcult to overestimate the importance in policy-making
of this line of development of utilitarian theory, although the
harms caused by its application as well as the dangers in prospect
may be considerable. Environmentalists rail at the application of
the techniques of cost–beneﬁt analysis to questions involving the
conservation of wild nature or beautiful countryside. How can
these goods be weighed in the balance?23 At the moment, however,
we are considering its theoretical underpinnings – and these are
not secure. There are two initial difﬁculties which both point in
the same direction. In the ﬁrst place it is obvious that desiresatisfaction may not be a good where the desire is ill-informed or
ill-judged. A sick child who hates the taste of medicine may have
her strongest desires satisﬁed when she pours it down the sink, but
if the child is ignorant of the properties of the compound or judges
that its taste is of greater importance than its curative effects, this
preference should be discounted. Its satisfaction is not a good. So
we modify the account, seeking value now in informed desire satisfaction. Other desires should be subject to scrutiny as well – and
this leads us to the second major difﬁculty. Take the desires of the
sadist. It looks as though our evaluation of sadistic behaviour will
require us to give some weight to the satisfaction of his desires,
with the utilitarian registering these in the balance with the
desire of the victim to avoid the pain the sadist is keen to inﬂict. A
squeamish desire-satisfaction utilitarian must hope and pray that
the dissatisfaction of the victim is greater than the satisfaction in
prospect for the sadist. But surely the satisfactions of the sadist
should not count at all in the evaluation of his conduct. That his
preferences are satisﬁed when he succeeds counts towards the evil
rather than the good of what he does. So again the account needs
to be amended; the good to be registered is now the satisfaction of
desires which are both fully informed and legitimate; illegitimate
as well as ignorant and poorly judged desires should be
discounted.

42

UTILITARIANISM

The difﬁculties are obvious. How much knowledge and rational
capacity do we need for our desires to count as sufﬁciently wellinformed? We need more than the child who believes that nothing
which tastes awful can do her good – but do we need as much
knowledge as the best science makes available before our desires
are sufﬁciently well-informed? How much good judgement do we
require, supposing all relevant information is to hand? Again, we
shall need more than the child who believes the avoidance of nausea is a greater priority than good health. But how much more is
not easy to determine. Smoking, one is told, reduces life expectancy by ﬁve years on average. Is there something defective in the
judgement of the well-informed doctor who continues to smoke
despite the risk to her health?
The response to the sadist example is even trickier. Defects of
knowledge and judgement subvert the natural authority of the
desires they generate and so there is more than a whiff of normativity in the requirement that desires be well-informed and soundly
judged. There must be, in prospect if not in place, canons for the
appraisal of desires from these perspectives. And these canons
cannot derive from considerations of utility upon pain of circularity in the account. This difﬁculty is even more evident in the case
of the requirement that desire-satisfaction be gained legitimately,
since the utilitarian needs a non-moral argument to show that the
desire for another’s harm, and the satisfaction gained from achieving it, should be entirely discounted.24 The most dangerous tack
here would be to distinguish as legitimate desires which are normal or natural, alluding to some spurious hybrid of folk biology
and religious dogma, of the kind that powerful churchmen are
prone to sell.
I do not believe that the utilitarian has the philosophical and
anthropological resources necessary to breathe life into the claim
that the fulﬁlment of desire is the root of all human value or that
desirability is the basis of a formal account of the good which
collects together all the qualities of life which humans value. If we
can describe separately, and vindicate as plausible, a range of
human goods, I see no point in adopting a theoretical apparatus
which collects them together under one label – as desirables or as
ingredients of happiness – if that apparatus does no work in the
ranking of outcomes as better or worse. In some cases we may

43

UTILITARIANISM

judge this action is best in respect of happiness, that in respect of
autonomy and so on. We may weigh the different appeals and claim
some action is best all things considered. But we shall not be able
to justify this latter claim by ﬁnding some secret ingredient or
common denominator which serves as an overall measure of utility. Instead, we shall be left with an ‘objective list’ account of the
good, making a case separately for each of the different elements.
Happiness, knowledge of one’s situation and affairs, sound personal relationships of love and friendship, good health, autonomy
and liberty, a sense of accomplishment, the recognition of beauty
in human works and nature: all these and more are candidates to
be explored. The major difﬁculty for the utilitarian will be to
explain how different mixes of these goods can be compared with
one another to the point where a verdict of ‘best outcome’ can
be delivered. But what the critic describes as a difﬁculty, the
utilitarian worth his salt will see as a challenge!
Review
I do not intend my review of utilitarianism to have the status of
knock-down criticism. Utilitarianism is in need of repair in several
of the areas I have mentioned and in others, too. But the dialectic
of philosophy reveals the major theories to have very great resilience in the face of damaging attacks and utilitarianism is no
exception. As critics propose refutations of greater and greater
depth and sophistication, advocates ﬁnd within their theories
resources hitherto unrevealed which serve for a time to repel
boarders and limit the damage of the assault. Thus far, I have been
examining the groundwork of utilitarianism, the basic elements of
the theory. I want to continue by looking at utilitarianism at work,
by reviewing the utilitarian story in respect of core political
values. This will serve not only as a basis for assessing the utilitarian contribution to political philosophy. It will also introduce
problems which we shall discuss in more detail in the chapters
which follow.

44

UTILITARIANISM

Utilitarian political theory
Liberty
There is a good historical reason why we should expect the utilitarian to have things of interest to say about the value of liberty.
The greatest of the classical utilitarian thinkers, John Stuart Mill,
has also been the most inﬂuential advocate of liberty. In On Liberty he argues mightily for civil liberty, for the opportunity to act
without interference from the state or, equally important, from the
intrusive pressures of busybody neighbours. So it would be surprising if the arguments he advances on behalf of liberty did not
have a utilitarian cast. And, despite the incorporation of distinctively perfectionist appeals claiming that liberty advances mankind
in the development of characteristic excellencies, Mill’s utilitarianism is evident throughout. Liberty is argued to be essential
to the well-being of both individuals and society.
One defect of Mill’s argument should be made clear from the
start, although it is perhaps anachronistic to point it out in a critical spirit. Moreover it is a defect we shall attempt to remedy later.
I am thinking of his lack of, or carelessness in, analysis. We ask
what does ‘liberty’ mean in the arguments and slogans of its advocates and detractors. Mill took it that both his supporters and
critics had the same things in mind and that, because his (and
their) understanding was equally capacious no harm was done. As
we shall see in the next chapter, this was a mistake. For now, we
shall suppose that our understanding of the ideal of civil liberty is
sufﬁciently well articulated for us to follow Mill’s defence of it.
The ﬁrst strand of Mill’s utilitarian defence of liberty is
developed in the chapter of On Liberty dealing with freedom of
thought and discussion. The main drift of the argument is
uncompromisingly utilitarian.25 There are beneﬁts to be had from
the propagation of true opinions, false opinions and opinions
which contain a mixture of truth and falsity. These beneﬁts derive
from the contribution made by a strong and uninhibited intellectual life to the progress of society. The cost of censorship and
other controls on the media of communicating ideas is the stiﬂing
of progress through ignorance of opportunities for betterment. On
the other hand, we may be able to identify kinds of circumstance in

45

UTILITARIANISM

which the costs of freedom of speech are excessive. Incitement to
damage (denouncing corn dealers as starvers of the poor to an
angry mob outside a corn dealer’s house, is Mill’s example),26 libel
and slander, and no doubt other sorts of action, may be legitimately prohibited. The costs, we must suppose, outweigh the
beneﬁts.
We thus have an argument for a speciﬁc structure of institutional protection. To procure the suggested beneﬁts, a society
should establish or respect a network of positive rules, which will
be a mix of constitutional, legal and non-legal permissions,
prohibitions and defences. We can each of us think of the most
effective way this strategy may be implemented and review our
institutions in the light of such a prescription.
Mill believed, plausibly I think, that freedom of thought and
discussion was a crucial means to social improvement – but I don’t
want to discuss this case here. Instead we should focus on the
structure of the argument, since Mill himself believed that in
defending this particular network of freedoms he was showing us
how arguments of this sort should be conducted. The ﬁrst thing
that is necessary is that we make out a case for the usefulness of a
speciﬁc practice, showing how conspicuous beneﬁts may be
attained if it is promoted and protected. If public speech and
debate are valuable, freedom to engage in them is necessary to
realize the beneﬁts. The same case could be made in turn for all the
major liberal freedoms; religious worship, secular association to
promote common interests, ﬁnding occupations one wishes to pursue, engaging in political activity: each of these can be defended
on utilitarian grounds and institutions devised to enable and
secure citizens’ engagement in them. And as with freedom of
speech, limitations and qualiﬁcations can be put in place where
utility dictates.
Notice that this is not an argument for liberty per se. Each pattern of activity must be vindicated separately with the case for
liberty falling out of the value of the activity described. The second element of Mill’s utilitarian defence of liberty explains how
liberty is a value independently of the value of the activities liberty permits. This is his argument for individualism as necessary
for the well-being of both individuals and society in Chapter 3, ‘Of
Individuality’, of On Liberty.27 Again the argument is a straight-

46

UTILITARIANISM

forward application of utilitarian principles. Mill explains how
the happiness of individuals is enhanced when they are free to
make their own decisions on how to act. Our happiness depends
upon the exercise of what he called our distinctively human
endowment. This comprises capacities for perception and forethought, reﬂection and judgement, capacities which are employed
most fully in the exercise of choice. To anchor the utilitarian credentials of this argument, we should note that the use of these
capacities is conspicuous in those activities which yield the
‘higher pleasures’ Mill famously (and controversially) defends in
Utilitarianism, Chapter 2. We shall be dwarfed and stunted creatures if decisions are taken for us, nothing like as happy as we
could be if we were our own masters. And if we were conscious
that opportunities for such educative decision-making were being
denied to us, we would experience a good deal of frustration as
well. Explicitly, Mill is drawing a contrast between societies where
choice is heavily circumscribed and individuals live spiritually
impoverished lives and open societies which encourage individuals
to draw upon and develop capacities which are necessary for them
to ﬂourish by creating for them maximal opportunities to work out
how best to live their lives.
Each individual is better off for having the opportunity of
decision-making created by the space of liberty because the very
act of decision-making brings its own rewards. It uses (and trains
and cultivates through regular use) mental capacities central to
our overall well-being. But individuals will be better off, too, since
the decisions taken are likely to be better than those which other
individuals take on their behalf. Individuals are most often the
best judges of what is in their own interests, of what constitutes
for them a full or rewarding life.
Think of a well-stocked newspaper shop with rack upon rack of
magazines catering for interests of highly specialized sorts – not
just one magazine for ﬁshermen, but three or four on trout and
salmon ﬁshing, the same number for coarse ﬁshing, a few for seaanglers, together with weekly newspapers for ﬁshermen of all
kinds. And then multiply the number as dozens of interests parade
themselves on the shelves. The thought is that just as we can select
any magazine to suit our interests, so, too, must we select these
interests ourselves. It’s hopeless to think of anyone, parents or

47

UTILITARIANISM

close friends even, still less Big Brother, dictating where our interests shall be directed. We make better decisions when we choose
for ourselves how to live because we are the best judges of where
our happiness lies.
So, not only are we happier because of the way we develop when
we make choices, we are happier for having the opportunity to get
what we know best to be good for us as individuals. And this is not
the end of the beneﬁts accruing from widespread liberty. Each life,
conventional or eccentric, will be an experiment in living from
which all stand to gain as enthusiasms give rise to expertise and
excellence produces role models as well as inventors. Mill’s vision
of society as a mutually supporting cosmos of independent centres
of excellence is inspiring.
But, as with all utilitarian appeals, it is no stronger than the
facts allow – the facts upon which the projections of utility are
based. And the facts of the matter cloud the vision. In my newspaper shop of alternative lifestyles, no consumers collide. Each
seeks out what they have decided they most want to be without
interfering with other prospectors. But the real world is not so
harmonious and well-aligned. Individuals get in each others’
way, deliberately block off each others’ chosen paths, do harm to
each other out of malice as well as in the pursuit of conﬂicting
interests.
So liberty generically identiﬁed has signiﬁcant costs as well as
undoubted beneﬁts. Can we keep the beneﬁts while limiting the
costs? Mill thinks we can. He believes he has established a presumptive (or to use some useful modern jargon – a pro tanto) case
for freedom. Some weight must always attach to claims for freedom
since beneﬁts will accrue whenever individuals are in a position of
choice: minimally to themselves, maximally to others. But these
beneﬁts may be outweighed when the exercise of liberty imports
excessive costs to others. Liberty may then be limited, for good
utilitarian reasons, in the case of actions which harm other
persons. The utilitarian can respect the presumption in favour of
liberty, yet limit liberty in cases where that presumption is
defeated – when one person’s exercise of liberty harms others.
We can give this qualiﬁed case for liberty expression by endorsing a harm principle which circumscribes intervention by the
state and society at large in the lives of members to those kinds of

48

UTILITARIANISM

activity which cause harm to others. This is Mill’s version of such
a principle:
The sole end for which mankind is warranted, individually or
collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of
their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which
power can rightfully be exercised over any member of a civilised
community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.28
Note ﬁnally, that as a good utilitarian, Mill believes he has established a necessary condition on legitimate interference. Whilst the
case for the prevention of harm to others must always be made
good if interference is to be judged legitimate, the fact that such a
case can be made does not of itself justify interference. There is a
simple reason for this. Interference carries its own costs. If the
only way the prospective harm could be prevented would be to
authorize a massive extension of police powers, for instance, the
costs of this extension might well exceed the beneﬁts promised by
the prevention of harm.
This is the utilitarian case for liberty at its strongest. We shall
return to the discussion of liberty in the next chapter.
Rights
The utilitarian defence of rights is obviously closely linked to the
utilitarian defence of liberty. Conceptual analysis is required, to
link as well as to distinguish claims of liberty from claims of right,
but at ﬁrst sight the right to free speech is at no great conceptual
distance from the ideal of freedom of speech – and the same goes
for other characteristic liberal freedoms. What talk of rights signiﬁes for many thinkers is a distinctive mode of justiﬁcation for
freedom, a mode of justiﬁcation which is to be sharply contrasted
with the use of arguments from utility. I shall take up these questions in appropriate detail later. For the moment I am content to
signal the leading elements of the utilitarian case for rights. And
once again, John Stuart Mill provides as good a starting point as
any.
We cannot complain that Mill does not attempt an analysis of

49

UTILITARIANISM

the concept of rights. To have a right is to have a legitimate claim
against other persons, a claim necessary for the promotion and
protection of vital interests.
When we call anything a person’s right, we mean that he has a
valid claim on society to protect him in the possession of it,
either by the force of law, or by that of education and opinion. If
he has what we consider a sufﬁcient claim, on whatever
account, to have something guaranteed to him by society, we say
that he has a right to it . . . . To have a right, then, is, I conceive
to have something which society ought to defend me in the possession of. If the objector goes on to ask, why ought it? I can give
him no other answer than general utility.29
Claims will be protected and promoted by rules and policies.
Again, these may be legal and/or non-legal rules and protection and promotion will require the actions of the state, lesser
associations and individuals.
The pattern of argument in defence of rights is thus beautifully
simple. Take a candidate right – the right to bodily integrity – and
spell this out minimally as a claim on the part of individuals that
they be neither physically assaulted nor raped. In defence of this
claim, the utilitarian will cite the suffering caused to victims of
such assaults and the anxiety created by insecurity to vulnerable
persons. Any society which is concerned with the well-being of its
members will identify as near-universal its members’ interest in
security. It will protect this interest through legal (and other
social) structures which deter and punish violators. So: to have the
human right to bodily integrity is to be in a position to advance
strong utilitarian arguments in favour of claims that interests in
personal security be promoted and protected by whatever institutional means are most efﬁcacious. Whatever human rights we
claim can be assessed according to this procedure. The utilitarian
has told us what human rights are and how they can be justiﬁed;
he will have available strong empirical studies to determine
how they are best defended in practice. What more does the advocate of human rights require? We shall return to these questions in
Chapter 4.

50

UTILITARIANISM

Distributive justice
Every society needs principles which allocate resources to members, principles which adjudicate conﬂicting claims and distribute
the beneﬁts produced by co-operative activity. It has long been
thought that utilitarianism has a special problem in formulating
principles to do this work. This thought is uppermost in the mind
of the critic: utilitarianism ranks outcomes in terms of maximization of the good, but different outcomes may yield the same
amount of utility, differing only in respect of the distribution of
that good between individuals. Most of us, however, believe that
some distributions are morally superior to others in point of fairness. They are more just. Some believe that equality in distribution
is morally desirable. How can any principles of distributive justice
be registered within utilitarian theory?
We can present the problem schematically with the aid of some
ﬁgures. The numbers represent units of utility, but it does no harm
to think of them for the moment as measuring wealth in £’s.
Persons
A

B

(1)

50

50

(2)

70

30

Outcomes

In both cases, utility scores are the same: aggregate utility =
100 units, average utility = 50 units. Thus far, the utilitarian has
no reason for favouring (1) over (2); the egalitarian, of course, will
disagree. And consider:
(3)

150

0

(3) is better than both (1) and (2) in respect of both aggregate and
average utility. But if we can imagine a society altering the rules
which determine who commands which resources so that the outcome shifts from that represented in (1) to that represented in (3),
wouldn’t we judge the new outcome radically unjust, although it is

51

UTILITARIANISM

productive of more utility? The utilitarian requires that we maximize utility, making the society of A and B, taken together, better
off overall. Our intuitions tell us that this would be unjust.
For many, this objection serves to refute utilitarianism; for
others, it signals a need that utilitarianism be supplemented by an
independent principle of justice in distribution. A utilitarian
worth his salt will try to reply – and a number of replies are
available which I shall sketch brieﬂy.30
Hume’s argument
The utilitarian wants to draw us away from simple models of the
kind we have been discussing. He is particularly concerned to dispute the claim that utilitarian theory can ﬁnd no place for principles of distribution. To review the case for the defence, a good
starting point is Hume’s account of justice.31 Hume argues (and I
summarize his views to the point of caricature) that human society
needs to establish rules of property (justice) which ﬁx who can
make legitimate claims on which resources if universally destructive conﬂict over scarce resources among folk of limited generosity
is to be avoided. If resources were inﬁnite and available upon
request, there would be no problem – but they are not. If persons
were predominantly generous, again there would be no problem –
but generosity is strictly limited. Our natural sentiments cannot
be relied upon to steer us clear of mutually damaging confrontations. We have to devise institutions which secure co-operation.
Which institutions do we select? To answer this question,
Hume’s focus shifts from a perspective of individual problemsolving to a speculation about the history or genealogy of institutions. We must suppose history to have been a proving-ground for
different solutions to the problem of justice. Rules of property
have been established – and gone under as they proved to be
inadequate. The enormously complicated residue of rules that
have stood the test of time have remained in place because they
represent the most satisfactory collective settlement. They are justiﬁed because of the security they confer and the beneﬁts they
promote. A system which spreads its beneﬁts sufﬁciently widely
will enjoy stable support; those sympathetic feelings which lead

52

UTILITARIANISM

citizens to approve the good which others receive transform one’s
personal interest into a virtue.
At the heart of this argument is a utilitarian claim. Distribution
is just when it effectively ameliorates the human condition and
gathers the support of those subject to its standards. These standards will be a dense thicket of laws and moral rules, intricately
interwoven, the bequest of mankind’s history to a speciﬁc society.
The reality of justice in operation cannot be reduced to a simple
model which bears comparison to other simple models. We are
grateful for what we have received – and properly so.
This is a conservative argument, endorsing institutions which
are ﬁxed in place because they have served utilitarian purposes.32
It suggests a cautious approach to reform in the name of improvement. Since we know the contribution made to human well-being
by institutions as they stand and can only speculate about the
beneﬁts to be gained from introducing changes, we should be
reluctant to pursue revolutionary ambitions, contenting ourselves
with a continuing programme of small-scale tinkering and
adjustment in the service of greater utility.
Equality
The utilitarian need not be entirely conservative or radically
opportunistic in the search for improvement. Well-known
principles may indicate fruitful directions to take – and the
articulation of such principles comprises further elements of the
utilitarian ideal of justice in distribution. The ﬁrst subsidiary
principle is likely to be a principle of equality, defended by the use
of a law of diminishing marginal utility much discussed by
economists. Imagine we have six persons dividing up a cake. Which
division will produce maximal utility? We can contrast an egalitarian division with each person receiving an equal slice with
inegalitarian proposals by noticing that consumers will get so
much satisfaction from a ﬁrst portion of cake – and some degree
less from each subsequent slice. The satisfaction to be gained from
further portions at the margin will diminish the more one has
already consumed. If three get two slices each and the other
three none, the lucky three will get less satisfaction from their

53

UTILITARIANISM

additional slice than the unlucky three would have gained from
their ﬁrst. We can imagine that satisfaction may even become a
negative quantity for the person who makes himself sick gorging
the lot! Another way of making this point is to argue that those
who receive less in an unequal distribution than they would
receive were the good to be distributed equally lose more from the
movement away from equality than is gained by the individual who
receives more of the good than equality dictates. This line of
argument suggests that our six cake-eaters should each receive an
equal share if we wish to maximize overall satisfaction.
This is a notoriously difﬁcult argument to assess. I spoke of
diminishing marginal utility as a ‘law’, but I cannot claim to have
much evidence for it – and it should not parade as an a priori
principle of practical reasoning. There are too many counterexamples for this to be plausibly claimed, as we shall see when we
discuss the criterion of need. The example I discussed only gains
whatever plausibility it has by making assumptions which may
strain one’s credibility in more realistic cases. We must suppose for
example, that the claimants are all equally hungry or equally satiated, that they all like cake to the same degree. At bottom, we must
suppose that we can both measure and compare, not only the portions of cake which we distribute, but also the satisfaction which
the different recipients derive. There is a technical debate here
which is crucial but which I shall leave once more unresolved.33
The principle of diminishing marginal utility may well be the kind
of common sense which is nothing more than the theory of some
defunct economist, but it does retain a point which is easy to recognize although difﬁcult to apply with any precision. I surmise
that if you were the executor of a will instructing you to allocate
the bequest to whichever charity you believed would do most good,
you would not spend long investigating the claims of Eton College.
Need
Diminishing marginal utility furnishes one (very rough and ready)
principle. Another principle which is widely recognized cuts
across it. To return to the example of the cake-eaters, suppose one
of the six is starving, the others are well fed. In this case, we may

54

UTILITARIANISM

judge that the starving person has claims of need which require
that she be fed ﬁrst with as much cake as would satisfy her hunger.
The utilitarian believes that he can account for the strength of
claims of need, trading on a feature of utility that we have
encountered already when discussing diminishing marginal utility, namely that a distribution of utility cannot simply be mapped
on to a distribution of resources. There we noticed that those with
more goods than equality dictates were poorer transformers of
extra goods into utility than those who had less. In cases where
individuals are identiﬁed as needy, we are supposing that these are
efﬁcient transformers of goods into utility, converting a given
input of resources into a better than average utility score. Thus in
the case of the cake-sharers, the beneﬁt to be gained by apportioning all or a large measure of the cake to the one who is starving
realizes more utility in sum than more egalitarian distributions.
And in fact we can imagine cases in which principles of equality
and principles of need can be combined to achieve maximal utility.
We may be able to save the starving person’s life by giving her half
the cake. The rest may be divided equally to preserve utility
against diminishing marginal returns.
This argument has great appeal. Claims of need – for food, shelter, physical mobility, medical and educational resources – have an
urgency which is widely respected. The utilitarian can register
this urgency in terms of the suffering of the needy and the degree
of satisfaction achieved when relief is provided. And he can justify
policies which systematically cater to need in terms of their output
of utility, which will be characteristically higher than average.
There are many who take responsiveness to need as an intuitive
constraint on accounts of just distribution. No theory of justice is
satisfactory if it cannot explain this constraint and endorse principles which respect it. The utilitarian believes he is on strong
ground here.
Again this is a difﬁcult argument to evaluate fully – and full
evaluation would take us far off course. It will in any case be taken
up later in Chapter 5. Let me limit discussion by making just two
points. The ﬁrst concerns the concept of need.34 This has proved
notoriously difﬁcult to analyse. Discussions have focused on
whether needs are identiﬁed objectively or subjectively and
whether some needs are universal or all needs are relative to the

55

UTILITARIANISM

circumstances of time, place and community standards. The most
plausible answers to these questions propose that needs are objective in a sense that desires, however deep and strong, are not. Some
needs may be universal – sufﬁcient food to sustain expenditures of
energy may be one – but most will be relative to standards of wellbeing which are regarded as acceptable minima within particular
societies. These matters need not be pursued further since I think
the utilitarian is essentially an observer rather than a protagonist
of these debates. Whether needs are objective or subjective,
whether the criteria for identifying them are universal or relativist, the utilitarian can pick up the results of the discussions and
explain how principles which promote utility defend the provision
for need. One can see how it might be argued that families in Western democracies need a wide range of consumer goods which their
grandparents regarded as luxuries. Possessing (or having the
option of possessing) a TV set may be necessary for a sense of selfrespect which is damaged by one’s inability to watch and converse
about the most popular soap operas. A dismal thought – but if it
were true, if the lack of such possessions were the source of great
misery, the utilitarian would take account of these facts.
The second problem concerning the utilitarian account of needs
provision also arises from considering the facts of the matter, the
facts on which the utilitarian bases his strategy. Implicit in the
concept of need is the thought that needs represent thresholds of
necessary provision. A person’s life cannot go well at all if that
person’s needs are not met. In extremis, he may even die for the
lack of the necessary good. Meeting the claims of need thus seems
discontinuous with satisfying the claims of persons who desire
goods over and above the threshold of needs. We might put this
point by claiming that a person who is in need of some good would
not rationally forego its provision in favour of any amount of
alternative goods which are above the need threshold. If I need
some medicine to recover from cancer (in normal circumstances) I
would not welcome the offer of a Porsche from a health service
manager who judges that this would be less costly, however much I
might have wanted the sports car hitherto. This sort of fact is what
makes needs provision an attractive policy for the utilitarian.
Unfortunately, the facts of the matter are not within the utilitarian’s control and this may be a case where he is hostage to them.

56

UTILITARIANISM

If claims of need are strictly discontinuous with any amount of
above-threshold desire satisfaction, we may be led to endorse any
amount of expenditure in cases where needs can only be met by
extremely expensive treatment. The value of a child’s life is
inestimable, we are often told, and mercifully a popular newspaper
campaign will induce some generous millionaire to fund the necessary course of treatment. But who would endorse the systematic
provision of all necessary resources to achieve some low probability of meeting dire medical need?
The utilitarian can go two ways on this. He can bite the bullet
and insist that overall gains do require whatever is necessary to
provide goods that are genuinely needed and on this basis call for a
radical redistribution of resources. Or he can revise his view that
the claims of need are discontinuous with non-needy claims. But
this threatens his belief that he has principles of justice that
reﬂect our prereﬂective intuitions about the strength of claims of
need. The utilitarian faces a genuine problem here – but perhaps
he can console himself that it is a problem that no theorist of
justice can easily avoid.
Desert
We have established that the utilitarian has something plausible, if
not deﬁnitive, to say about distributions of resources that favour
equality and the meeting of needs. Another important principle,
which many prereﬂectively endorse, is that goods should be allocated to those who deserve them, in particular to those who have
worked hard in the production of goods and services. Can the utilitarian accommodate any principle of desert?
The traditional utilitarian strategy has been to reduce claims of
desert to the provision of incentives. First, there is the piece-work
argument: if I cut down twice as many trees as you, working
harder, I deserve more ﬁnancial reward than you do. You could
have worked as hard as I, but you took a longer lunch break and
sunbathed for a couple of hours in the afternoon. Behind this
claim, it is suggested, is the thought that greater productiveness
requires the incentive of greater reward. Second, it is often
claimed that some skills need a good deal of effort to acquire –

57

UTILITARIANISM

extra years at school, the rigours of university education and possibly a further poverty stricken period of postgraduate training.
How can one induce youngsters to undergo these hardships –
necessary if society is to have architects, doctors and lawyers –
unless subsequent salary levels provide the incentive?
I am deeply sceptical of both of these arguments and invite
readers to penetrate for themselves the smokescreen of
unrealistic, self-serving rationalization which they throw up. But
if it is true that the incentives argument is often unconvincing, the
utilitarian can hardly be faulted if he doesn’t endorse it. If, on the
other hand, this is how the labour market works to the advantage
of all, the utilitarian can use these facts to justify incentive
payments. There may be more to desert as a principle of distribution than my discussion of incentives has intimated, so I shall
take up the issue later.
The state
I shall bring to a close my survey of utilitarian political thought by
outlining a utilitarian view of the state. Once again, my contribution will be brief to the point of caricature. But again the discussion will serve to introduce some of the central topics of political
philosophy.
Political obligation
One such – perhaps the central topic of political philosophy – is the
problem of political obligation. Can the state make a legitimate
call on our obedience? Do we have a moral obligation to comply
with the demands made by the state through its legislation?
The utilitarian tradition has a very strong answer to these questions. One clear reading of Hobbes identiﬁes a profound utilitarian strain in his arguments. Hobbes describes a condition in which
we have no government – the state of nature – which is so awful
that we would ﬁnd good reason to institute a government if we
were in this condition and good reason to preserve one if a government were already in place. Without government, in circumstances technically described as anarchy, there would be no stable

58

UTILITARIANISM

property, no investment in industry or agriculture, no commerce,
no arts and sciences, no building of bridges or arts of navigation.
The life of man would be ‘poore, solitary, nasty, brutish and short’,
to quote his famous phrase.35 This argument touts the beneﬁts of
government as the antitheses of the evils of the natural condition,
evils so evident and widespread that everyone has good reason to
avoid them in the only way possible – by accepting an obligation to
obey the law of the sovereign.
I said that Hobbes’s argument bears a utilitarian reading
because its conclusion would be welcome to the utilitarian who
seeks to justify sovereign authority. Such authority, we are told, is
necessary for everyone to be happy, to get what they want, or to
promote other independent values. But it is important to recognize
that Hobbes himself was not a utilitarian, he was an egoist, accepting a theory which identiﬁes the good as relative only to the agent
who experiences it.36 So we should recognize a coincidence rather
than a conﬂation of views. Hobbes’s case is that sovereign authority can be justiﬁed severally to each rational agent concerned to
promote his or her own best interests; it procures their mutual
advantage. The best outcome for each coincides with the best outcome for all since each, distributively, has good reason to endorse
that institution which maximizes beneﬁts for all, collectively. The
utilitarian can accept Hobbes’s conclusion and much of the argumentation which establishes it without endorsing the egoism on
which it is based.
This was noticed by David Hume. Hume insists, time and again,
that the reasons we have for allegiance derive from the ‘public
utility’ of government: ‘. . . government binds us to obedience, only
on account of its public utility’ (and public utility is the only satisfactory defence for disobedience, ‘in those extraordinary cases,
when public ruin would inevitably attend obedience’).37 Government is necessary for justice, justice is necessary ‘to maintain
peace and order; and all men are sensible of the necessity of peace
and order for the maintenance of society’.38 Hume does not deny
that self-interest can give us a reason to obey the government, and
this reason is buttressed by our fear of the coercive powers which
governments exert, but self-interest can also give us grounds for
disobedience. Our original, Hobbesian, interests must be checked
and restrained by reﬂection on the universal beneﬁts of peace and

59

UTILITARIANISM

public order. ‘The observation of these general and obvious interests is the source of all allegiance, and of that moral obligation
which we attribute to it.’39 Hume has no doubt that reﬂection on
the widespread beneﬁts of government will give rise to a sense of
obligation rooted ﬁrmly in an ‘opinion of interest’; ‘the sense of
general advantage which is reaped from government; together with
the persuasion, that the particular government which is established is equally advantageous with any other that could easily be
settled’.40
Perhaps it is better to see this as a utilitarian form of argument,
rather than a convincing utilitarian case. The anarchist, for one,
would not accept it since he would reject the skimpy account of
the facts of the matter. The Hobbesian groundwork – the description of anarchy in the state of nature as impoverished and dangerous – would be immediately challenged by the counterassertion
that mankind lives well without the state. Masterless men do not
ﬁght, they co-operate amicably. It is men under government who
are the real moral dwarfs: used to being ordered about, under constant threat of punishment for non-compliance, willing to disobey
the law and harm each other as soon as they see an opportunity of
personal advantage with impunity. Such creatures contrast poorly
with moral agents unconstrained by the chains of government.
These paragons – and it is important for the anarchist that this is a
moral status which we are all capable of attaining – would determine what is right and follow the rule, showing no interest in what
they could get away with.41
At this point in the argument it is important to locate the debate
between the pro- and anti-government camps as an issue of fact.
Hume and his followers believe a little knowledge of history, a
small measure of experience, taken with a moment’s reﬂection,
will establish that government is justiﬁed in terms of the advantages it so obviously brings. The utilitarian anarchist begs to
differ. Government diminishes our well-being. I do not wish to
adjudicate this dispute now, being content to signal the quality of
the debate amongst utilitarians concerning whether or not we do
have an obligation to obey sovereign authority. Supposing that
right is on the side of Hume, we can go on to the next question,
which concerns the best form of government.

60

UTILITARIANISM

Democracy
Continuing his argument concerning the optimal rules for property distribution, the system of justice, Hume believed that,
apart from some small opportunities for limited improvement,
the best form of government is likely to be the one we have got
in place. Whatever its form, we can accept it as a most suitable
response to local problems in local conditions, given the history
of the population in the locality. It will be some mix of monarchical and republican traditions, incorporating elements of
authority and freedom. Bentham, writing shortly after Hume,
regarded this sort of complacent conservatism as the defence of
the indefensible. First principles are available from which we
may deduce that the only legitimate form of government is
democratic. Leisurely rumination in a comfortable armchair,
scholarly allusions to Thucydides and Tacitus – these are no
substitute for rigorous theory where appropriate theoretical
techniques are to hand. If we are genuine utilitarians, we can
inspect the mechanisms of the different forms of government –
monarchy, aristocracy, democracy, plus a host of mixed and
qualiﬁed forms – to see which of them best facilitates utilitarian
purposes.
Bentham thought institutions were legitimate if they maximized
happiness. Government is necessary to constrain the worst effects
of rampant self-interest and to engineer co-operation. These purposes are effected by law, and the test of good law is whether it
maximizes the happiness of all those who are affected by it. How
can we tell, of two proposed remedies for a social problem, which is
the best? One answer is to call in the wisest utilitarian calculator
you can ﬁnd, the expert in this domain of economics, sociology or
futurology. Mercifully, we do not have to inspect credentials in
these spheres since a short cut is available. Policies can be
appraised by working out how they impact upon the happiness of
the target population. Why not assume that each member of the
population is the best judge of his or her own happiness and leave
it to them to declare, on this basis, which policy they favour? If the
declaration is made in a ballot, and if each contribution is
weighted equally in the process of counting, then a majority decision will suit more members of the population than it frustrates.

61

UTILITARIANISM

The policy favoured by the majority will produce more happiness
than any alternative.42
This argument is blissfully simple. It is also plausible given the
wealth of circumstances in which we recognize its application. It is
my turn to make the arrangements for a holiday with ﬁve friends.
Do I book a fortnight of sun, sand and surﬁng or do I arrange a
holiday visiting art galleries, cathedrals and ﬁne restaurants? It
would be quite wrong to foist on my friends my own heavyweight
conception of what would be in their best interests, all things considered – isn’t the best policy just to ask them what will please
them most and go along with the majority decision? That way we
maximize satisfaction; and even the frustration of the minority
will be tempered by the thought that they prefer the company to a
solitary trip to their ﬁrst-choice destination.
The obvious objection to this argument attacks the source of its
immediate appeal – its simplicity. What is obviously best policy
when arranging holidays is not necessarily wise for a legislator.
We shall look at democratic theory more closely, later, but for the
moment we should mention some of the assumptions that are made
when this argument is used in a political context.
First, the argument applies most conspicuously to direct democracies where ballots are taken on speciﬁc proposals as they
arise. If the question to be answered is: Which party shall form the
next government? it should not be assumed that each policy subsequently enacted by the elected party promotes the welfare of the
voters who mandated the party to govern. Representative democracy is a different creature from its directly democratic cousin,
and the differences deserve the closest scrutiny – which is not to
say that the utilitarian cannot make a contribution to the defence
of representative institutions.43
Second, the argument assumes that the utility of each democratic decision can be computed independently of the utility of
other decisions, taken before or after. This assumption may be
false. Persons may get increasingly dissatisﬁed as they ﬁnd themselves in the minority party on successive occasions. ‘Win some,
lose some’, fairly represents the democratic temper, but one who
ﬁnds himself losing all or most decisions, may experience incremental increases in displeasure. It has been shown that it is technically possible, within a democracy, for a majority of persons to

62

UTILITARIANISM

be in a minority on a majority of occasions.44 Over the longer run,
when the outcome of a number of democratic decisions is
reviewed, it may be that the tally of good achieved is not a simple
sum of the good these decisions would have produced had they
been considered separately. If there is a large but solid minority
which votes together over a wide range of issues and attracts a
sufﬁcient number of different ﬂoating voters on each occasion of
voting, the frequently disappointed majority will get increasingly
fed up. The workings of the system will induce measures of frustration independently of those produced by speciﬁc decisions. If a
majority is entrenched because of religious or ethnic afﬁliations
this dissatisfaction will turn into the anger of perceived injustice.
In which case, the majority principle will be rejected.
Third, the argument assumes not only that interpersonal comparisons are possible, but that the impact of decisions for and
against is equal in respect of all those who implement or suffer
them. Again, this may not be true. A majority may be lukewarm in
favour of the winning policy. The defeated minority may be rabidly
hostile. The utilitarian democrat must just hope that partisans of
the opposing sides experience an equal average degree of satisfaction and dissatisfaction, each side being composed of protagonists
hostile or in favour in roughly equal measure of intensity. Maybe,
with a large enough population, this assumption is realistic. But
the phenomenon, recognized daily, of the passionate minority
interest group pursuing policies which would impact in a mildly
inconveniencing fashion on large numbers of puzzled or cynical
opponents, equally suggests that this assumption is complacent.
These are technical difﬁculties which it would be a mistake for
the utilitarian to discount. Nonetheless, it would be quite wrong to
dismiss wholesale the utilitarian instinct to ask people to register
their preferences, then judge as right the policy which results from
the ballot. We all know that majorities can be mistaken and that
counting heads does not settle the matter of truth in a controversy,
but we should remember that these truisms give strength to the
elbows of those with something to gain from deciding issues for us.
Bentham thought the arguments for democracy were perfectly
straightforward – to the point where he suspected any rejection of
them was motivated by class- or individual self-interest. ‘Sinister
interest’ was the term he employed to characterize the motives of

63

UTILITARIANISM

those who advance claims for greater power under the cloak of
greater wisdom. If the message of the utilitarian case for democracy, direct or indirect, is, ‘Beware of sinister interests’, we
should be wise to heed it.

Conclusion
In this chapter I have introduced utilitarian theory as a powerful
and inﬂuential project in ethics. I make no claim to have investigated the foundations of this theory in any depth. My main interest has been to show how utilitarianism ﬁnds application in the
study of central problems in political philosophy. I hope, as a
result, to have introduced the reader to issues which will be
explored in greater depth later, with the utilitarian treatment of
these issues in place as a foil.
Although I have mentioned difﬁculties in the utilitarian story, it
would be fair to say that my emphasis has been on the strengths of
the account, detailing the contribution which utilitarian thought
has made to our understanding of the problems which emerge as
we think philosophically about our political life. Let me end this
discussion with a few remarks about what I see as utilitarianism’s
greatest weakness. I do not locate this in the foundations of the
theory. For some, this is the source of its deepest ﬂaws. Utilitarianism, we are told, does not take seriously the separateness of persons. It can give no satisfactory account of the importance to all
agents of their individual projects and the sense of integrity which
is challenged when these deep aspects of an agent’s personality
come into conﬂict with the greater good. It threatens the importance to us of claims deriving from particular relationships, claims
of friendship, love and allegiance. These are strong objections 45 –
and where they resonate in political philosophy I shall take them
up later. But as one might expect, the utilitarian is putting up a
robust defence.46 The worry I have with utilitarianism is quite different and can be simply stated. It concerns the possibility of calculating the greater good. Here I suspect the utilitarian is caught
between two stools. The ﬁrst is the tendency towards conservatism
which we identiﬁed in Hume’s thoughts about justice in the distribution of property, the legitimacy of government and the duty of

64

UTILITARIANISM

obedience. Take any ﬁrmly entrenched institution or practice, or
any generally accepted moral rule. How does the utilitarian evaluate these? Hume supposes that the lessons of history have taught
us, over the long run, that the institutions and practices have
proved themselves to be maximally beneﬁcial. John Stuart Mill
offers a similar account:
As men’s sentiments, both of favour and aversion, are greatly
inﬂuenced by what they suppose to be the effects of things upon
their happiness, the principle of utility . . . has had a large
share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most
scornfully reject its authority.47
Again,
. . . mankind must by this time have acquired positive beliefs as
to the effects of some actions on their happiness; and the beliefs
which have thus come down are the rules of morality for the
multitude and for the philosopher until he has succeeded in
ﬁnding better.48
Mill is not a conservative thinker. He is not suspicious of proposals for reform. If utility is promised, even the most radical
reforms should be implemented. What I am emphasizing here is the
assumption that utility supports existing rules and practices until
utility dictates that reform is due, that present practice is the
default position. And this assumption is grounded in nothing more
than the thought that utility has guided history in the generation
of optimal rules and practices. How could we possibly know this?
The very necessity for radical reform in some instances – a thought
more accessible to Mill than to Hume – shows that history may
have taken a path away from that which utility shows to be
optimal.
The utilitarian’s readiness to consider that existing institutions,
practices and rules maximize utility by default seems tailor-made
to achieve a reﬂective equilibrium between theory and moral
beliefs. The insight should not be dismissed, but it should be recognized that there are challengers in the ﬁeld. Some philosophers,
Rousseau for one, have claimed that history is the record of the

65

UTILITARIANISM

degeneracy and immiseration of the species.49 The utilitarian
appeal to history for vindication seems to reﬂect, by contrast, a
belief, if not in providence, then in the progress of mankind
towards the best possible condition.
One thing is for sure – the utilitarian has not done the work his
quasi-science suggests should be undertaken if he is content to
make the sort of grand gestures towards history we have seen in
Hume and Mill. Furthermore, the critic will not be surprised at
this omission. How could this work be accomplished? What sort of
facts do we have available for a genuine contrast of government
and anarchy, liberty and authoritarianism, private and common
property, societies with promises and societies without them?
Experiments are impossible and historical episodes are too cluttered with the particularities of time and place to permit ready
generalization.
Utilitarianism on the grand scale might therefore seem an exercise in rationalization or wishful thinking, depending on whether
its focus is on the present collection of rules and institutions or on
future alternatives. But perhaps utilitarianism works successfully
when its focus is narrowed to the judgements of speciﬁc acts or
policy proposals. Again, I have my doubts. The most ambitious
attempts to quantify outcomes are the work of welfare economists,
and it is fair to say that this work has not been widely persuasive. I
remember listening to E.J. Mishan describing the work of the
Roskill Commission. Their task was to ﬁnd the optimal site for a
third London airport and different sites had advantages and disadvantages which required evaluation and comparison. The whole
audience was doubled up with laughter as Mishan listed the factors the Commission had solemnly taken account of. These
included prospective damage to the black-bellied race of Brent
Geese who migrate each winter to feeding-grounds at Foulness on
the Essex coast, the destruction of medieval churches in Hertfordshire and the provision of non-seasonal employment for citizens of
Southend-on-Sea who were overly reliant on summer migrants
from the East End of London.
Of course, the cost–beneﬁt analyst does not suppose that there is
an easily identiﬁable common denominator which will permit a
ranking of alternative policies. Radically different goods such as
those I have mentioned are assessed in terms of the preferences

66

UTILITARIANISM

consumers express with respect to them, and preferences are signalled by willingness to pay as signalled by questionnaires and
opinion polls where no money changes hands. ‘Shadow prices’ are
worked out for goods, like the Brent Geese and medieval churches,
which do not have a market price.
I am persuaded by critics of these methods that the enterprise is
misguided, particularly in respect of environmental goods. From
my study window in the centre of Glasgow I can see the mountains
of the Isle of Arran, ﬁfty miles away, whenever there is some north
in the wind. Fifty years ago, factories cast a smokescreen over the
city which was dispersed only rarely, on Sundays and public
holidays. My life is better for the view – but how can that be
quantiﬁed?50 I conclude (after too little argument) that when
utilitarianism abandons the assumptions of a providential history
and gets down to the brass tacks of policy appraisal using the
techniques of welfare economics, it is likely to fail here, too.
There may be a middle road – of common-sense evaluation of
outcomes in terms of an objective list of values that we are used to
comparing and trading off in familiar dilemmas.51 This will have to
be worked out in detail. We can properly reserve judgement on the
success of the utilitarian enterprise, even as we keep in mind its
systematic contribution to the problems of political philosophy.

67

Chapter 3

Liberty

Introduction
One enjoyable, though probably fruitless, way to spend an afternoon would be to discuss which is the most prominent or important political value, which ideal carries most clout in political
debates – in public bars or parliaments. Candidate values might
include justice (more particularly, human rights or equality), democracy, and certainly, liberty. It is hard to think of a political manifesto that does not trumpet the prospect of liberty – and it is easy
to think of fractious political disputes where freedom1 is a contender on both sides of the issue. Freedom in education requires
the provision of educational opportunity for all, free at the point
of service, some say; others, that it signals the parents’ freedom to
choose the education they judge best for their child. These different aspirations may collide if resources do not permit them both to
be fulﬁlled.

69

LIBERTY

Liberty, liberalism, libertarianism
We shall examine the different ways in which liberty may be
appealed to, but one thing is sure: whoever makes such appeal is
attempting to claim the moral high ground. Just why this is so is a
matter of delicate analysis, not least since ‘the meaning of this
term is so porous that there is little interpretation that it seems
able to resist’,2 as Isaiah Berlin notes. Before we proceed in this
direction, however, it will be useful to distinguish the value of
liberty from a couple of other terms closely associated with it –
‘liberalism’ and ‘libertarianism’.
Of the two, ‘liberalism’ is the hardest to capture in a nut-shell
deﬁnition. As with other ‘-isms’ in the domain (conservatism,
socialism . . .) it signals a cluster of political ideals advocated (and
put into practice) within a tradition of political thought and political activity. Major contributors to the literature of liberalism
include thinkers as diverse as Locke, Montesquieu, the Federalists,
Constant, de Tocqueville, J.S. Mill, T.H. Green, Karl Popper, F.
Hayek and latterly, John Rawls and Joseph Raz – and this is a very
selective list. Probably the only thing that unites members of this
list is that they all subscribe to a strong value of individual liberty
– and even then we should note that they speak in different voices
when this value is canvassed for our endorsement. For some, the
heart of liberalism is captured in Locke’s claim that all men are
born free and equal; others shudder at the commitment to equality.
For still others, liberalism requires the opportunity to participate
in democratic institutions; some liberals discount this, insisting
that democracy represents a separate or subordinate value, or no
value at all, or even a threat to liberty.
Conspicuously, liberalism amounts to a different political
agenda in different places. In Britain, liberalism as a political
movement is a halfway house between conservatism and socialism,
shifting in policy content as these other political movements veer
away from or move towards the middle ground. In the United
States, liberals have bleeding hearts, and for many ‘liberal’ has
become a dirty word. Anyone who advocates welfare programmes,
indeed much public spending beyond what is necessary for defence
and law and order, is likely to be castigated as liberal.
Key liberal themes include the right to private property and

70

LIBERTY

advocacy of the rule of law as well as defence of the traditional
freedoms – freedom of speech and artistic expression, freedom of
association, religious freedom, freedom to pursue the work of
one’s choice and freedom to participate in political decision procedures. ‘Liberalism’ is a poor, but indispensable, label, perhaps
best understood when one has a clear idea of the movements or
ideologies which most conspicuously oppose it in its different
manifestations.
Libertarianism is a much less amorphous creature. It is the theoretical stance of one who strictly limits the competence of government to collective defence, the protection of negative rights,
rights of non-interference, and enforcement of contracts. The state
on this account has the two tasks of the night-watchman – to
guard the city walls against outside attack and to patrol the city
streets, ensuring that citizens are not murdered, raped, robbed or
defrauded. The state has no role in the provision of education,
health-care or social security payments, no duty to redistribute
resources amongst citizens for purposes other than the rectiﬁcation of violations of rights. We shall study the libertarian agenda
in Chapter 4. In the meanwhile we shall try to understand better
the concept of liberty.

Analysis
Philosophical analysis promises clariﬁcation, but with a concept
as diffuse and battle-scarred as liberty, we should not expect quick
results. We shall soon see that there are many concepts of liberty,
as Berlin suggested. It is not that the term is ambiguous in any
straightforward way. ‘I sat by the bank and wept’ is quickly sorted
out, but a dictionary won’t tell us what Patrick Henry had in mind
when he cried ‘Give me liberty or give me death!’ If there are
indeed more than two hundred senses to this word, I would rather
someone else took on the job of charting them. We need to put
some limits on the enterprise of analysis.
In the ﬁrst place, we shall focus on liberty as a political value.
There are two aspects to this demand: we can ignore obviously
non-political usages and we shall insist that a proper analysis
makes clear why proponents of liberty have claimed it as a value.

71

LIBERTY

The former point is perhaps trivial; political philosophy has no
interest in explaining why liberty bodices are so called or in relating freedom of speech to newspapers which are free, gratis and for
nothing (as against frank, fearless and free!). The latter point –
that freedom is a value – is of considerably more importance, since
there are clear accounts of freedom which can be criticized and
rejected on the grounds that they offer either no account of why
freedom is a value or an account that is plainly defective. One way
of arguing for this conclusion is to claim that liberty is not a valueneutral concept, it is always normative, always accompanied by a
positive ethical charge. Thus to describe a condition as one of
liberty is to attribute a positive value to it and hence to begin
making out a case for it. On this account, it would be selfcontradictory to disvalue a liberty or to describe a condition of
liberty as wrong or evil. John Locke clearly employed the concept
of liberty in this way when he made a sharp distinction between
liberty and licence, claiming that the state of nature as he
describes it, is ‘a State of Liberty, yet it is not a State of Licence’,3
since man is governed by the law of nature.
I am inclined to think this is right, but there are plenty of
reasons to give one pause. ‘Is liberty of the press a good thing?’,
ask pundits and parliamentarians, anxious that they might be
found out. This question would only make sense if the use of
‘liberty’ here does not imply that liberty is a positive value, if the
usage is in some way non-standard – which it may well be, ﬁnding a
purely descriptive meaning in terms of the speciﬁc institutional
practices of a particular state. My own view, which could not be
defended without some measure of stipulation, is that this debate
may indicate the only distinction that can be drawn between liberty and freedom. The concept of freedom, I believe, is thinner
than that of liberty and carries less evaluative baggage. ‘Ought
citizens be free to . . .?’ is a perfectly straightforward question. We
have no difﬁculty in thinking of some freedoms as worthwhile and
others not so. If I could tidy up the language, I would do so, distinguishing two kinds of freedom: that which we approve I would
designate liberty; that which is disreputable I would call licence.
Sadly, I am impotent in these matters, so let us leave this matter of
terminology unresolved.
This does not mean, however, that the connection between

72

LIBERTY

liberty or freedom and value is indeterminate. Whilst it may not be
a conceptual truth that liberty is valuable, it must still be required
that philosophical accounts of liberty explain why it has generally
been accepted as valuable and why its advocates regard it as valuable. Of course the political philosopher need not endorse such
accounts – they may bear witness to widespread illusion – but if so
the error must be comprehensible.
Second, despite my insistence that we focus on liberty as a political value, we must not draw the lines of conceptual demarcation
too tightly. John Stuart Mill begins his essay, On Liberty, with a
disclaimer in the ﬁrst sentence: ‘The subject of this Essay is not
the so-called Liberty of the Will, so unfortunately opposed to the
misnamed doctrine of Philosophical Necessity; but Civil, or Social
Liberty.’
Mill may be right to separate these philosophical questions. It
may turn out that the metaphysical question of whether or not
there is such a thing as free agency is quite independent of issues
concerning political liberty. But we cannot begin our enquiries
with such an assumption in place since it may turn out that an
account of the value of political liberty which is successfully
embedded within a wider account of free action will be deeper and
more satisfying. A link between a satisfactory account of free
agency, considered generally, and political or social freedom may
also help us with our ﬁrst objective – to see why liberty is of value
to its protagonists.
Mill’s speciﬁc objective limits the range of the concept of liberty
in another way, since it ought to be an open question whether, as
he believes, the question of liberty is exhausted when we have
investigated ‘the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual’ (as the quotation
above continues). Mill imposes this latter restriction deliberately
because he believes that, in his day, democracy poses sharp threats
to civil liberty. He has in mind the possibility of majority tyranny
and the levelling spirit of democracy which may lead to an intolerance of social experimentation and personal eccentricity. He
believed de Tocqueville’s reports of democracy at work in America: give a measure of power to everyone at the town meeting and
conformity will soon become a parochial priority. These dangers
are real, but as we shall see, liberty may require democratic

73

LIBERTY

institutions just as surely as democratic institutions require
strong liberties.
Isaiah Berlin: negative and positive liberty
Isaiah Berlin’s Inaugural Lecture, ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’, has
proved to be one of the seminal contributions to political philosophy in the twentieth century. It is remarkable for the resonance
of its analytical apparatus and the depth of its historical foundations. It is also notable for the strength, and perhaps dogmatism, of
its conclusions. Berlin distinguishes negative and positive liberty
and, on his account, these different senses of liberty are elicited as
the answers to two different questions.
If we ask, ‘What is the area within which the subject – a person
or group of persons – is or should be left to do or be what he is able
to do or be, without interference from other persons?’ we characterize an agent’s negative liberty. ‘Political liberty in this sense is
simply the area within which a man can act unobstructed by
others.’ If we ask instead, ‘What, or who, is the source of control or
interference that can determine someone to do, or be, this rather
than that?’4 we aim to describe the agent’s positive liberty. This is
summarized later as ‘the freedom which consists in being one’s
own master’.5
Negative liberty
Let us look more closely at negative liberty. The clearest exponent
of the simplest version of negative liberty was Thomas Hobbes,
who deﬁned a free man quite generally as, ‘he, that in those things,
which by his strength and wit he is able to do, is not hindered to do
what he has a will to’.6 Negative liberty is often glossed as the
absence of coercion, where coercion is understood as the deliberate interference of other agents. In recent times, the most rigorous
version of negative liberty, ‘pure negative liberty’ has been articulated by Hillel Steiner, but since it is an implication of Steiner’s
analysis that not even the most draconian laws can inhibit liberty,
because they render acts ineligible rather than impossible, I judge
that it has little relevance to political philosophy, despite its

74

LIBERTY

inﬂuence.7 Negative liberty, of the Hobbesian kind that is compromised by coercive threats as well as other modes of prevention,
is often contrasted with theories (if there are such) which imply
that mere inabilities inhibit liberty. Berlin quotes Helvetius to
make this point: ‘It is not lack of freedom [for people] not to ﬂy like
an eagle or swim like a whale.’8
The evident truth of this conceals a difﬁculty, nonetheless. Suppose I can’t walk because my enemy has tied me up or broken my
leg. Here, too, there is a straightforward inability but we would
judge this to be a case of freedom denied because the inability is a
direct result of another’s action. But suppose that my inability to
walk is the result of a medical condition – and this condition can
be remedied by an operation which I cannot afford. Am I unfree if
others fail to pay for my treatment? The case differs from my
inability to ﬂy like an eagle in two ways. First, humans can walk in
normal circumstances but they will never be able to ﬂy like eagles.
Second, the condition is remediable whereas human ﬂightlessness
is not. Do these differences count? Before we tackle this question,
let us see how this problem arises within Berlin’s account of
negative liberty.
Berlin insists that we should distinguish between the value of
(negative) liberty and the conditions which make the exercise of
liberty possible.9 Thus there may be freedom of the press in a country where most citizens are illiterate. For most, the condition
which would give point to the freedom – literacy – does not obtain.
In these circumstances, Berlin would insist that illiteracy does not
amount to a lack of freedom. Clearly something is amiss in a society which fails to educate its citizenry to a level where they can
take advantage of central freedoms, but that something need not
be a lack of freedom. A basic education which includes literacy
may be an intrinsic good, or it may be a human right. Its provision
may be a matter of justice, its denial, transparent injustice. But
however this state of affairs is described, we should distinguish
a lack of freedom from conditions under which it is hard or
impossible to exercise a formal liberty.
Berlin has his own reasons for insisting on this point. He has a
laudable concern for clarity; obfuscation and confusion result if
different values are elided by careless argumentation. More
importantly, he wants us to recognize that different fundamental

75

LIBERTY

values may conﬂict. The demands of justice or security may
require the truncation of liberty, or vice versa, in circumstances of
moral dilemma or irresoluble tragedy. There is a natural tendency
to seek escape by assimilating the strong differences, by attempting to redescribe the awful circumstances as having only one value
at stake – in which case we can take whichever course of action
maximizes the unifying value or minimizes its violation. For Berlin, these are strategies of self-deception. They lead to ‘absurdities
in theory and barbarous consequences in practice’.10
It is hard to dispute this claim. The twentieth century is replete
with examples of regimes which have instructed their subjects
that solidarity or the service of the state comprise true justice, real
freedom, genuine democracy or the greatest happiness, wrapping
up all tensions and incipient conﬂicts in a totalitarian cocoon
which silences the clamour of otherwise inescapable debate. This
tendency is the chief target of Berlin’s philosophical endeavours
and we should endorse his aims. However, it is difﬁcult to relate
this general caution to the issue concerning liberty and its
conditions.
In the ﬁrst place, it is worth noting that Berlin himself cannot
maintain the distinction wholeheartedly. Negative liberty has been
curtailed by ‘social and economic policies that were sometimes
openly discriminatory, at other times camouﬂaged, by the rigging
of educational policies and of the means of inﬂuencing opinion, by
legislation in the sphere of morals’.11
It would seem that the key to determining whether such policies
inhibit negative freedom is whether the limiting condition on the
exercise of liberty was either an intended limitation or, if
unintended, a limitation which it is possible to abolish. Policies
which are openly or covertly discriminatory are likely to be unjust,
but if they restrict opportunities available to others they offend
against freedom as much as justice. Berlin is quite correct to insist
that we should keep separate values distinct. But we do not confuse or conﬂate different values when we condemn a practice that
offends two or more of them – we strengthen the criticism.
There is another error induced by Berlin’s emphasis on the
clear-minded discrimination of different values. No one could
object to the distinction between liberty formally achieved and the
satisfaction of conditions which are necessary if the full value of

76

LIBERTY

liberty is to be attained. It is important that both be implemented
and vital that breakdowns or shortcomings be accurately identiﬁed if remedies are required. Nonetheless, if it is true in a particular case that the full value of liberty is not obtained, because of
remedial illiteracy or physical handicap for example, then the
prime reason for reforming the inhibiting conditions will be liberty itself. If we have identiﬁed social conditions which frustrate
the achievement of a recognized good, then that good itself serves
to vindicate efforts to eliminate these conditions. Suppose we discover that a system of land tenure has become a cause of famine;
we don’t need any reason beyond the abolition of famine to tackle
the conditions which created it. And the same is true of liberty; if
freedom of the press is worthwhile, being necessary if citizens are
to be informed participants in the democratic process, this is reason enough to secure the condition of widespread literacy which
enables citizens to make use of it.
What is really at stake here is an issue of political rhetoric. If we
are concerned to effect reform in health provision or education or
social security, it may well be that we have a choice of values that
we can cite in order to gain support for our proposals. We can
advance our cause under different banners. Social justice and
freedom may both serve; in which case, it is a matter of practical,
strategic judgement which value we highlight in our campaign.
The temper of the times, signalled by the success of an opposing
party, may favour an appeal to liberty. The astute politician may
then argue that liberty requires obvious conditions on social provision to be met if the proclaimed value is to serve as more than a
shelter for the privileges of the rich. This rhetoric may succeed or
it may fail. The electorate may judge the argument which has been
advanced as too elaborate to be convincing – and vote against.
Having learned his lesson, the astute politician will try a different
route and rediscover social justice.12 I stress that this process of
selecting values in which to couch political rhetoric is philosophically respectable. We do not equate or confuse the different
values of liberty and social justice when we recognize that a case
for speciﬁc reforms can be supported by either or both. Which
value we choose for a particular campaign is not a matter of philosophical propriety. Both could be advanced together if this were
thought to be effective.

77

LIBERTY

We have reached a capacious understanding of negative freedom
by exploiting materials furnished by Isaiah Berlin. The most obvious difference between his proposal and ours is that we are more
ready to countenance as hindrances or obstacles, conditions which
limit persons’ opportunities; which conditions may not have been
imposed by human agency, but if they can be eliminated, they
ought to be.
How do we identify conditions which ought to be eliminated?
On the account, thus far, I am unfree with respect to any
opportunity which I cannot presently take, but which I could take
advantage of were others to resource me. I am therefore unfree to
visit the moon, whereas I am not unfree to ﬂy like an eagle. Does
this fact, of itself, establish a claim on my behalf against those
individuals or governments which could furnish me with the
necessary resources (as they have found them for some fortunate
others?) If claims of freedom are moral claims, as I insisted at the
beginning of this chapter, we need some further account of which
opportunities ought to be available to persons, since I take it that
no one would identify a case of unfreedom in my inability to make
a moon landing.
I have in mind a condition of freedom which has been described
by Ralph Wedgwood as social empowerment. 13 On this account, the
ingredients of freedom will comprise ‘the social conditions that
confer favourable prospects with respect to wealth, income, and
the knowledge and skills that can be acquired through education’,14 as well as the standard list of liberal freedoms – so long as
those social conditions are attainable. But again, not all social
empowerment is of value. We should not empower potential bank
robbers by reducing legal limitations on their access to weapons or
by granting them resources to purchase them. A principle of liberty which is going to be useful must enable us to identify justiﬁable claims for empowerment – and I don’t think this can be
achieved within the framework of the negative concept of liberty.
In order to advance, we need to specify the opportunities that
ought to be available to claimants. This requires the development
of a positive concept of liberty.

78

LIBERTY

Positive liberty
This is how Isaiah Berlin introduces the concept of positive
liberty:
The ‘positive’ sense of the word ‘liberty’ derives from the wish
on the part of the individual to be his own master. I wish my life
and decisions to depend on myself, not on external forces of
whatever kind. I wish to be the instrument of my own, not of
other men’s, acts of will. I wish to be a subject, not an object; to
be moved by reasons, by conscious purposes which are my own,
not by causes which affect me, as it were, from outside. I wish to
be somebody, not nobody; a doer – deciding, not being decided
for, self-directed and not acted upon by external nature or by
men as if I were a thing, or an animal, or a slave incapable of
playing a human role, that is, of conceiving goals and policies of
my own and realizing them. This is at least part of what I mean
when I say that I am rational, and that it is my reason that
distinguishes me as a human being from the rest of the world. I
wish, above all, to be conscious of myself as a thinking, willing,
active being, bearing responsibility for my choices and able to
explain them by references to my own ideas and purposes. I feel
free to the degree that I believe this to be true, and enslaved to
the degree that I am made to realize that it is not.15
This is a capacious nut-shell. But we shall see that the notion
of positive liberty is more expansive yet. As Berlin develops
his historical-cum-conceptual story, a sequence of ideals,
initially attractive then progressively more sinister, is charted. To
summarize, in cavalier fashion:
(a) Self-control and self-realization. This involves my working on
my own desires – ordering, strengthening, eliminating them –
in line with a conception of what it is right or good for me to
do or be. This is a complex notion, with its heart in a sophisticated account of freedom of action. In modern times the
development of this account can be traced through Locke,
Rousseau, Kant and Hegel. It has re-emerged in the recent
work of Harry Frankfurt and Charles Taylor.16 We are well

79

LIBERTY

used to the idea that we exhibit self-control when we resist
temptation. Freedom of action consists in our ability to
appraise the desires which prompt us to act and to decide
whether or not to satisfy them. On this account, the paradigm
of freedom consists in our going against what we most want,
doing what we think best. But as Hegel pointed out, the best of
all worlds for the free agent is that in which what, after due
reﬂection, we believe is the right thing to do is also what we
discover we most want.
(b) Paternalism. Suppose I am not able to exercise this selfcontrol. I may be ignorant of what is best for me. I may not
understand the full value of alternatives. Like the child who
does not wish to take the nasty-tasting (but life-saving) medicine, I mistake my real interests. In such circumstances, the
wise parent will not be squeamish. She will force the medicine
down. Might it not be justiﬁable, then, for you to exercise the
control over me that I am unable to achieve or sustain? Might
not my freedom require whatever control over me that you can
exercise – absent my own powers of self-control? This thought
is particularly apt where your paternalistic intervention creates for me or sustains conditions of autonomous choice that
my own activities thwart. This is a deep issue, which we shall
examine later, but it is hard to see how some varieties and
instances of paternalism can be rejected. And it is hard to
deny that my freedom is promoted when you liberate me from
temptations that I would reject were I in a calmer, saner or
more knowledgeable condition, when you empower me to act,
despite my self-inhibiting dispositions.
(c) Social self-control. But if I exercise my freedom through selfcontrol, and if you promote my freedom by appropriate paternalistic intervention, may not my freedom be further enhanced
by institutional measures that I endorse? In the republic of
Rousseau’s Social Contract,17 citizens achieve moral and political liberty by enacting laws, backed by coercive sanctions,
which apply to themselves as well as to others. If, as an individual, I cannot resist a temptation which will likely cause me
harm, wouldn’t it be a wise stratagem to devise some social
mechanism which will bolster my resolve? If I realize that the
threat of punishment against me will keep me on the straight

80

LIBERTY

and narrow path which wisdom alone cannot get me to follow,
shouldn’t I institute and accept social restraints which are
more forceful than my unaided moral powers? And in doing so,
don’t I expand my true freedom? Ulysses tied himself to the
mast to resist the Sirens’ call. As a result, he gained a freedom
lost to his unfortunate shipmates. Addicts of all sorts can seek
the discipline and social order of the clinic or self-help group
as a means of liberation. A wise citizen in a democratic state
will establish laws and voluntarily submit to the regulatory
power of the state where self-control cannot sufﬁce, and thus
achieve freedom – or so the argument goes.
(d) State servitude. An unwise citizen, unable to exercise immediate self-control and insufﬁciently far-seeing to enact or
endorse devices of social coercion, can nevertheless attain
freedom indirectly and at second hand if the state effects the
necessary control, notwithstanding his disapproval or lack of
participation. The state can control us in the service of our
real interests – and thereby make us free. This is a recipe for
totalitarianism – in four seductive philosophical steps!
This is a brief, analytic summary of Berlin’s potted history. But I
think it carries the drift. More importantly, it shows the complex
dialectic whereby a plausible and historically inﬂuential understanding of freedom of action can be elaborated into a doctrine of
social freedom. Second, and equally important, it illustrates how
the doctrine of positive liberty acquires its moral content. The
central thought – that liberty is the opportunity or capacity to
achieve something worthwhile – is explicit at the ﬁrst stage of the
argument in the ideal of self-realization. This canvasses one’s
freedom as the control of her desires in the light of some conception of the good life, some account of the virtues, some principles
of right action.
Berlin himself favours the sparse, negative concept of freedom,
believing this can accommodate all political aspirations to the
core liberties and enable us to locate liberty within a range of
potentially conﬂicting values. His chief criticism of positive liberty is that the sequence of ideals we have just canvassed represents a slippery slope. If we endorse the initial equation of freedom
and self-control, we shall be unable to arrest a fall into the

81

LIBERTY

embrace of the ideals of totalitarianism, whereby the state promulgates a conception of the good life and yokes everyone into its
pursuit. The most potent criticisms of Berlin deny this. But before
I discuss this response, I should deal with another inﬂuential
objection to his analysis.
MacCallum’s response
Gerald C. MacCallum, Jr proposes an alternative analysis. For
him, freedom is best understood as a triadic relation between
agents, opportunities and preventing conditions. Thus each statement of freedom (and unfreedom) can be unpacked in terms of this
schema: x is free (unfree) from y to do or be z. This analysis of
freedom statements carries the implication that all freedom is both
negative and positive – freedom from as well as freedom to.18 Joel
Feinberg has argued for a similar analysis, ﬁnding additional variables through, for example, a distinction of internal and external
constraints: an inhibiting neurosis, such as agoraphobia, can
restrict my freedom as strongly as a locked door.19
How can one adjudicate this dispute? Berlin, himself (and one of
his recent defenders, John Gray)20 claims this is mistaken; a person
in chains may wish to rid themselves of their chains without having any clear idea of what they wish to achieve through their freedom. This strikes me as a possible but most unusual case. It is
certainly not a paradigm of negative freedom, since, in the standard case, McCallum’s analysis not only will apply but must apply if
we are to identify the demand for freedom. Taking the example
literally, one will generally suppose that the prisoner wishes, at
least, to move around unshackled, but there may be more at stake.
The demand that I be unshackled may be predicated on a case for
freedom of assembly, freedom to attend church, freedom to engage
in any activity from which I am effectively disbarred – and it is as
well to know which freedom is at stake.
Gray’s objection to Feinberg’s more sophisticated analysis is
equally unpersuasive, viz., that since the admission of internal
constraints allows ‘as constraints on freedom constraints and evils
(such as headaches, disabilities) that are not unfreedoms at all’
freedom is obliterated as a distinct political value.21 Feinberg can

82

LIBERTY

reply directly that the distinctness of freedom as a political value
is best captured by investigating which constraints do, and which
do not, inhibit political freedom. Headaches may cripple personal
freedom. They are not likely to ﬁgure amongst the constraints that
politicians either impose or could alleviate, but if they do so ﬁgure,
they limit political freedom, too.
I conclude that, so far as the analysis of the language of freedom
is concerned, the criticisms of McCallum and Feinberg must be
well taken. Linguistic analysis does not permit us to draw the distinction which Berlin employs. But this is not the end of the matter. McCallum goes further, arguing that the use of analytically
unsound labels will lead to confusion and error as we afﬁx them
to inappropriate positions. He thinks we should avoid dubbing
Smith a theorist of negative liberty or Jones a proponent of
positive liberty since most philosophers of historical signiﬁcance
will advance complex doctrines which are best viewed as a
combination of the two. I think this caution is timely, too.
However, I don’t think that Berlin has made this mistake; despite
the grand sweep of the historical materials he surveys, he is
remarkably sure-footed. Moreover, I suspect that Berlin is right in
his claim that much of the literature on political liberty can be
fruitfully placed within one or other of two major traditions
within the history of ideas. Berlin’s chosen apparatus for identifying the different traditions – distinguishing two leading questions
– is certainly clumsy, but the distinction he draws captures a very
real difference.
We can pinpoint this difference by considering a problem concerning freedom of action. Take the case of the addict. What I
want most now is a cigarette – and so I smoke one. I don’t, however,
want to be a smoker. When I smoke, do I act freely? On that starkly
negative conception of freedom elaborated by Hobbes, my freedom
is attested by my getting what I most want. No one has stopped me
doing what I please. On the alternative conception of freedom,
described above as the ﬁrst step on the road to positive liberty, I
have not acted freely. If I don’t want to be a smoker, if I want to be
in a condition where I don’t want cigarettes, if I view myself as a
pathetic appetitive creature whose desires have got out of control,
the experience of doing what I most want to do will be the very
experience of unfreedom, a personal slavery to obnoxious desires.

83

LIBERTY

What is distinctive here is that I disvalue getting what I want. We
shall discuss this view, most familiar perhaps from Kant’s moral
philosophy, later under Rousseau’s rubric of ‘moral liberty’.22
This dispute cannot be adjudicated here, but notice how sharp
the conﬂict is. The one example gives rise to diametrically
opposed verdicts concerning the smoker’s freedom of action and
the difference between the two verdicts derives from the applicability to the judgement of whether I act freely of normative
considerations concerning whether what I do is best. On the
Hobbesian account of free action norms concerning what I ought
to do are irrelevant. On the Rousseauian or Kantian view, they are
central.
We can shift the discussion towards an analogous political dispute. Do all coercive laws limit my freedom? The coercive instruments of the state, generally the police, may just stop me from
getting what I want, but in the usual case the whole apparatus of
the criminal law (police, courts, prisons) works by raising the
potential cost of illegal activities – a cost speciﬁed by the conventional tariff of punishment. There are two views one might
take. On the ﬁrst, I am unfree whenever the criminal law proscribes what I want to do. Suppose what I most want is to eliminate
my rival for promotion. The bad news is that since this is illegal, I
am unfree to kill her; severe penalties are prescribed for murder.
Judging that the possible gains are not worth the risk, I refrain.
The good news is that the disvalue of my unfreedom is outweighed
by the value to her of her survival.
A very different (positive) analysis of freedom requires that the
option variable, what it is that I am not forbidden to do when I am
free to do it, is not satisﬁable by an action that is morally wrong.
Suppose I make a very bad moral mistake and think that all is
permissible in love and war and business, including the killing of
rivals for promotion. On this positive analysis of freedom, my error
is compounded. Since it is wrong to murder rivals, murdering
rivals is not the sort of thing one could logically (or conceptually)
be free to do. It follows that one’s freedom is not impugned by laws
that threaten punishment for those who are convicted of murdering their rivals for promotion. Extrapolating from this example to
the common case, one’s freedom is not limited by coercive laws
which prescribe punishment for wrong-doing. It is, in Locke’s

84

LIBERTY

phrase, licence, not liberty, that is curtailed. It is not a case of the
bad news (my freedom’s being limited) being outweighed by the
good news (less murder). There is no bad news when I am stopped
or inhibited from doing what is wrong in any case. Opportunities
to do wrong with impunity do not enhance my freedom. If I am
inhibited from doing what I most want by what I believe the state
demands of me – and hence resist the temptation to murder the
competitor – my freedom will not be abrogated. As we saw above,
citizens should welcome the power of a state which constrains
them to keep to what they know is the right path. If we think of
freedom as the condition of social empowerment canvassed above,
almost paradoxically, we can recognize the coercive agency of the
state as enabling us to do what we believe to be right, refraining
from wrong-doing and pursuing the good life.
I have outlined two opposing positions. Which is best? The question is still open despite my biased exposition of the differing
claims they make. A theory of freedom developed in recent years
takes a very clear view of the issue.
The republican theory of freedom
The republican theory of freedom has its recent origins in the
work of Quentin Skinner and has been developed in some depth by
Philip Pettit and Jean-Fabien Spitz.23 The republican theory has
classical foundations in the ideal of liberty proposed for the
Italian city-states of the Renaissance. Historically, it was an
aspiration for both states and citizens, celebrating both their
independence from potentially dominant neighbours and a
constitution which was republican, with citizens (generally, some
portion of the adult male population) taking up public ofﬁces and
living under the rule of law. Such a constitution contrasts notably
with despotic or monarchical regimes; citizens have a robust moral
and civic standing – they are not slaves or the ethical subordinates
of arbitrary rulers. This way of thinking about liberty is the product of a distinctive tradition, with respectable classical sources. It
incorporates a speciﬁc conceptual analysis and is claimed to
present an attractive political ideal.
It is glossed by Pettit as ‘non-domination’:

85

LIBERTY

someone dominates or subjugates another, to the extent that
1. they have the capacity to interfere
2. on an arbitrary basis
3. in certain choices another is in a position to make.24
Non-domination is to be distinguished from non-interference,
from self-mastery and from that collective self-mastery which is
exhibited in participation in directly democratic decision procedures. It is a status concept, expressive of the equal comparative
moral and legal standing of all citizens. So, against those theorists
who value negative liberty, it is claimed that one can be subject to
dominion without interference. If a woman has a gentle master, a
master, perhaps, who is susceptible to her wiles, if he will not
interfere so long as, like Sheherazade, she can spin out his
entrancement, she is free according to the negative theory, but not
on the republican account. As a dancing girl, raconteuse or slave,
or, in modern times, a clever wife with a doting husband but no
legal rights against his possible molestation, she is unfree even if,
de facto, in charge.
Further, we may be subject to interference but not dominated, by
just coercive laws. These will be laws that are not arbitrary – and
non-arbitrariness comes in two forms: the laws are enacted by the
processes of a proper constitution and they are in accordance with
citizens’ interests as informed by their values. In the ﬁrst form, we
have the ‘empire of laws, and not of men’.25 This wonderful slogan
is more perspicuous for what it excludes rather than designates. It
excludes the caprice of monarchs and the whim of suspicious dictators. It includes (probably) a host of constitutional devices
intended to protect the innocent citizen from this sort of
unpredictable intervention in her daily business. Laws must be
enacted by the citizens or their representatives, promulgated
widely and comprehensible universally; ofﬁces should be open to
all on the basis of ability and popular endorsement.
Second, the laws which direct citizens’ conduct and legitimize
sanctions against criminals should be fully in accordance with
their interests and values. It is possible that laws which are ideal in
point of their provenance can still get it wrong. In which case, an
aberrant majority, say, will still prescribe arbitrarily. Such laws,

86

LIBERTY

impeccable in point of their source, will infringe freedom. So, we
may conclude that arbitrariness in two distinct fashions must be
absent if laws (or other coercive social instruments) are to leave
freedom intact.
This is a complex and wide-ranging theory of freedom; what
holds it together is the idea of non-domination. I have my doubts
about this. Non-domination is an important and central personal
and political value, and the republican theorists deserve great
credit for giving it new life. It is related in clear ways to liberty. The
difﬁculty, to my mind, is that the theory gives the concept of nondomination too much work to do. Non-domination can be understood narrowly, embracing differences of status or quasi-moral
authority; here what is vital is a capacity to interfere in the actions
of others solely on the grounds of differential status. Slave-owners
best exemplify this model of domination. Their interference in the
lives of the slave will be arbitrary in that the slave will have to do
whatever the slave-owner wishes. His demands may be more or less
onerous in fact, but it is clear who is the master and who is
dependent on the master’s requirements.
The slave’s debilities are twofold: she is subject to the master’s
commands and dependent on his graces. She is both biddable and
vulnerable. For Rousseau, dependency was the great vice of economic systems which foster inequality; differences in property
holdings are soon magniﬁed into differences of social status which
are then entrenched as differences of political power. Strikingly,
dependency becomes symmetrical. Everyone suffers, though not
plausibly in equal measure, when the masters become dependent
on their slaves.26 In The Phenomenology of Spirit, Hegel ampliﬁes
this criticism of human relationships which are marked by domination and subordination.27 In disbarring the possibility of mutual
recognition, they distort the self-images of the protagonists to the
point where they are both incapable of fulﬁlling their potential as
equally human self-consciousnesses. This material, which stresses
the psychological damage inﬂicted in unequal power relationships,
has been used to criticize all manner of social dependencies: men/
women, husband/wife, employer/employee, imperial power/colony.
At its heart is a thesis concerning the personal and social importance of reciprocal, mutual recognition and the necessity of
various forms of equality in achieving this.

87

LIBERTY

I concede that this thesis has strong implications for politics; it
calls directly for some version of equal citizenship, most evidently
that of equal participators in a democratic decision-making procedure. Non-domination, thus construed, ampliﬁes that strand of
thinking about liberty which stresses self-control in both its personalized and social versions – important elements in the positive
conception as described by Berlin. It is hard to see how nondomination, identiﬁed in this narrow fashion, can be used to place
limits on a sovereign power which comprises a body of equally
powerful citizens.
And yet Mill, famously, and Pettit, latterly, insist that it must. To
be fully non-dominating on the republican account the laws must
track the interests and values of the citizens.28 Legislation, however non-dominating its source in democratic institutions, must be
non-arbitrary in its content as well. Mill’s solution was to insist
that legitimate legislation should respect the harm principle – ‘the
only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any
member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent
harm to others’.29 Other philosophers have stressed the role of
human rights in delineating the proper competence of the sovereign power, howsoever democratic it may be. These are issues we
shall broach later. For the moment, let me conclude simply that I
cannot see how such restrictions on the content of law-making can
be derived from non-domination in the narrow sense that I have
sketched. Perhaps a wider one will serve, but we should be wary of
losing the clear content of the concept of non-domination as we
extend its application. The real lesson we should learn from the
republican theory of liberty is the necessary complexity of any
persuasive account of the value of political liberty.

The value of freedom
In what follows, I shall attempt to give such an account. First
though, let us review our progress so far. We have on the table
versions of the ideals of positive and negative liberty charted by
Berlin, together with an example of how (and how not) to construct a hybrid theory. All three are candidates for our philosophical allegiance; they have sound analytic credentials. How do

88

LIBERTY

we select between them? My suggestion is that we accept as an
anchor the thought that political liberty is a value and endorse
that account, or construct a fresh one from the assembled ingredients, which best explains why it is precious to us, in extremis, why
so many have been prepared to die in its cause.
This approach requires us to strike out negative conceptions
which stress the intrinsic value of our being able to get what we
want without being stopped. Unless what we want is itself of some
value, the freedom to pursue it is just about worthless. Contrariwise, and this is the lesson of one way of thinking about positive
liberty, the value of liberty is the instrumental value of whatever
worthwhile opportunities liberty grants. So, freedom of thought
and discussion is valuable because thought and discussion is valuable. Freedom of worship is valuable because religious worship is
valuable. And so on. These would be poor liberties, though, if their
exercise was compulsory. We would value being able to speak up at
Hyde Park Corner a good deal less if we were required to do so
once a year. So the whole value of liberty cannot be instrumental.
In the most impressive recent work on freedom, Joseph Raz suggests that freedom is of value since it is deﬁned as a condition of
personal autonomy.30 But personal autonomy turns out to be a very
complex personal and social condition. Whilst acknowledging my
debt to Raz’s work, I want to develop from scratch – or at least from
more classical philosophical material – an elaborate account of
freedom which does justice to a range of persuasive views about
the value of the condition. In so doing we shall interweave some of
the doctrines that have been outlined above.
A theory of freedom is no doubt tidier if it can encompass the
traditional problems of free will and free agency as well as the
issue of political liberty. Theorists who attempt a unifying theory –
Hegel, amongst the great dead; Stanley Benn in modern times31 –
are ambitious, but for many, including John Stuart Mill, confusion
and muddle are the intellectual cost of this synthesizing ambition.
I have no brief for tidiness against truth, but I do believe that those
strands of the positive liberty tradition which emphasize the link
between freedom of action, generally considered, and political liberty contain an important insight. To make this point, I need to
outline in more detail that strand of thinking about the nature of
free action which I mentioned as the ﬁrst ideal of positive liberty

89

LIBERTY

and labelled ‘self-control’. Readers who are properly sceptical
about my conclusions are invited to pursue the literature on these
difﬁcult issues. Readers who are knowledgeable of the literature
on free will will recognize what follows as a tendentious gloss.
Freedom of action
We do not act freely when nothing or no one stops us getting what
we want, if we have no control over these wants. For many, as we
have noticed, the experience of unfreedom is most acutely felt
when one pursues the satisfaction of desires he despises himself
for suffering. If I know my hands are clean, accept that no good
purpose is served by washing them for the umpteenth time this
morning, recognize that my obsession disables me from other, better, projects, and still ﬁnd myself going to the hand-basin – since
that, it appears, is what I most want to do, for reasons that are
unfathomable to me, I get what I want, but act unfreely. To act
freely, reason, in some fashion must be brought to bear on my
desires. At its simplest, I must want to want what I try to get,
appraising the ﬁrst-order desires which assail me in the light of
second-order desires which operate on them.32 But not just any
second-order wants will serve to establish my freedom. What if I
am uncritical, a ‘wanton’, in respect of my second-order desires?33
True freedom is realized when actions are determined by desires
which are ordered in the light of some conception of the good or
are expressive of qualities of character (virtues) produced by
strong evaluations of how it is best to live.34
This account of free action is not new, although it is certainly
fashionable. Important elements of it can be traced in Locke,
Rousseau, Kant and, most thoroughly, in Hegel’s Philosophy of
Right. It captures one strand of thinking about autonomous action
– we are free when we are in control of what we do, acting against
what, phenomenologically, are our strongest desires when this
is called for by reason or morality or the ethical demands of
communities we recognize as authoritative.
This ancient and modern way of thinking about free action
raises many difﬁcult questions which I shall sweep aside for present purposes. There are two central points which I want to lift from

90

LIBERTY

these discussions: the ﬁrst can be expressed in positive or negative
fashion; I act freely when I am the author of what I do, when my
actions issue, in recognizable fashion, from my own deliberations.
Reversing the coin, my freedom is evinced in actions that are not
the product of brute nature working through me by prompting
desires which I blindly follow. Further, if I follow rules or ordering
principles when I oppose, control or select amongst the heteronomous forces that assail me, these are rules which I select or
endorse. They must pass some test or ﬁlter imposed by my capacity
for reason, most famously the Kantian rule of the Categorical
Imperative. Negatively, they are not alien impositions. They may
have been taken on board at the command of some superior
authority, be it parent, priest or politician, but such commands
will be legitimate only if the commands directly or their putatively
authoritative sources have passed some test of rational legitimation. (Some have asked, concerning Kant’s Categorical Imperative: Where is the freedom in following rules which are the product
of quasi-algorithmic calculation? One answer to this hard question is that the rules which pass the test are not the commands of
anyone else.)
The second point we should notice is that freedom of action, far
from being constrained by rules or principles of conduct, requires
their positive endorsement and efﬁcacious employment. There is a
danger that this point may look overly restrictive and overly moralized. Do I not act freely when I select the colour of toothbrush
I wish to use? What rules or principles are in play here? Most
choices that we make can be effected absent of any moral
considerations. When did you last take a decision that hinged on
scrupulous moral deliberation?
A plausible response to this objection is to claim that free
actions must be sensitive to appropriate moral considerations
when these are in play. The free agent has a moral gyroscope, ﬁnely
balanced and ﬁrmly set. He will be alert to circumstances in which
principles of conduct may impact. Suppose there has been trouble
and strife in the family caused by careless use of toothbrushes (and
what issue is in practice too trivial to disturb domestic harmony?).
If Fred has promised that he won’t buy a pink one again, alarm
bells should ring as he approaches the supermarket shelf. If he is
insouciant and thinks only of what colour would match his razor,

91

LIBERTY

something has gone wrong. If the alarm bells never ring for Fred –
and this sort of moral blindness is chronic – we have a case of
someone who is not fully in control of his actions. Contrariwise, if
Fred thinks through what colour toothbrush to buy in the light of
the agreements that he has made and the principles which dictate
ﬁdelity to those agreements, his actions are not unfree simply
because they are constrained by his moral scrupulousness.
I don’t think an acceptable account of political liberty can be
derived in any thoroughgoing fashion from insights such as these
concerning freedom of action. But they are suggestive. They are
likely to colour the story told by one who accepts them. They may
delineate the contours of the favoured account, as we shall see.
Autonomy
A different starting point can take us towards a similar conclusion. On the starkest conception of negative liberty, that of
Hobbes, we act freely when we are not hindered in getting what
we want, given that this is physically achievable. Mill, in a careless
moment, endorses this account: ‘liberty consists in doing what one
desires.’35 The value of freedom can be swiftly inferred. It is the
value of getting what we want, doing as we please. Thus put, the
value of freedom is instrumental; it amounts to the value of whatever we want, which our freedom is instrumental in enabling us to
get. If we are unfree in a given respect, we either cannot get, or can
get only at too great a cost or risk (of punishment, generally) whatever is the object of our desire. This account of the value of freedom has the great virtue of being simple and straightforward.
Moreover it enables us to rank freedoms in respect of their value
to us. This will be a function of the value of the activities
that freedom permits. The more important is the object of desire,
the more important the freedom to get it, the more serious the
restriction in cases where we are made unfree.
The weakness of this account should be evident from our consideration of freedom of action. Although I am prepared to admit
the general importance of getting what we want and, a fortiori, the
freedom that permits us to achieve it, we cannot assume that this is
true across the board. What the agent wants may be plain evil – the

92

LIBERTY

thrill of causing pain and suffering to someone else – or harmful to
the agent himself. In such cases, since the satisfaction of his desire
is not itself a good, neither is the freedom to achieve it. We should
conclude that freedom is an instrumental good only where there is
some positive value to the agent’s satisfaction of his desire. If freedom is an intrinsic good, good per se, its goodness must be at least,
in part, independent of the value of the opportunities it makes
available. So even where the choice is that of doing something evil
or refraining, the news is not all bad, since there is some positive
value to the agent in being able to actively select amongst the
options available.
This idea has to be treated very carefully, since it has great
intuitive appeal. What is the value of choice? Minimally, choice is
just plumping, going for one alternative rather than another with
no grounds to guide one’s selection. Do I choose heads or tails
when you toss a coin, do I put my chips on the red or the black at
the roulette table? No doubt I would feel (and be) deprived if you
were to both toss the coin and choose heads for me. It would be a
funny roulette table were the croupier to place the bets! So the
value of choice even in this minimal situation is not negligible.
Nonetheless, the value to me of just plumping is not great. The
lottery punter who goes for the Lucky Dip rather than selecting
her own six numbers has forgone little of value.
But not all choices are as experientially bereft as these. Mill
himself dwelt on the value of choice to the chooser. He described
what he called ‘the distinctive endowment of a human being’ as
‘the human faculties of perception, judgement, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference’ and claimed that
these ‘are exercised only in making a choice’.36 What sort of
choices did Mill have in mind? Clearly it was not choices of the
‘heads or tails’ variety, nor even more challenging ones, concerning the texture of the anaglypta wallpaper, perhaps. He was
concerned rather with choices amongst alternative plans of life.
Again, this is a point which must be advanced carefully. It is not
sufﬁcient that we have in mind something like big moral decisions.
This is the Kantian value of autonomy. It is realized when human
agents deliberate about the right thing to do. They apply the
rational will, a transcendental capacity to employ reason to test or
generate moral principles in the light of which they thereupon act.

93

LIBERTY

We can grant that Kantian autonomy is exercised under conditions of freedom which permit agents signiﬁcant opportunities to
work out what is the right thing to do, but if this is the core value
of freedom we may ﬁnd that freedom does not provide the best
circumstances in which autonomy may be developed. In the aptly
named ‘Kantian Gulag’,37 Flint Schier points out that
autonomy can ﬂourish under the most oppressive and despotic
regimes. Poets like Mandelstam and Akhmatova continued to
produce their own poetry even in the darkest moments of
Stalinist terror and repression. Bruno Bettelheim has told us
how communists and priests in particular were able to maintain
their moral gyroscopes even in the grotesquely convulsed
circumstances of Nazi concentration camps.
Schier noticed how survivors of the camps could fear freedom,
anticipating that the free life would not have the moral density
experienced in surroundings where daily life was fraught by
decisions concerning how best to live a life of moral integrity. It
can be a hard decision that one should look one’s captors in the
eye. And to do so continually can be a hard and risky policy. It is no
surprise that those who left the camps, especially those who took
up a comfortable life in the USA, Western Europe or Israel, were
prone to deplore the superﬁciality of the culture they embraced,
contrasting it unfavourably with the horrors they had escaped in
respect of the opportunities it afforded for a life of deep moral
seriousness.
What is missing from life in the Gulag is the freedom to live one’s
life in accordance with goals of one’s own choosing.38 Mill’s notion
of a plan of life is central here, so long as we do not read his
prescription in too literal a fashion. Encouraged by talk of agents
as authors of their own life, constructors of their own lifenarrative, one may construe this ideal in implausibly dramatic
terms. Politicians, writing their autobiographies, encourage us to
do so when they portray the happenstance of a successful climb up
the greasy pole as the successful implementation of youthful
designs executed on the back of an envelope. We can write the
story for them. Success at school is to be followed by an Oxford
Scholarship. Stunning reviews for her role of Portia in a garden

94

LIBERTY

production of Merchant of Venice will accustom her for future
glory as President of the Union. After a few years in the city or at
the bar, having earned a fortune, she will stand for Parliament in a
by-election. Swift promotion will see her as Prime Minister at the
door of 10 Downing Street – and out come the family photographs
of her posing with policeman and proud parents in the same
doorway, thirty years before.
This should not be our model of an autonomous life. Mostly,
autonomous agents will see their lives as a muddle, but their own
muddle, a series of advances and withdrawals meeting with moderate success and some (perhaps frequent) failure. Far from being a
blueprint resolutely followed, the autonomous life will be identiﬁed retrospectively as the agent claims responsibility for the
courses she has followed and the streams down which she has
drifted.
We must not make the autonomous life too heroic an aspiration.
The modest measure of autonomy I have described requires a societal framework where pathways are available for exploration even
if the traveller is likely to take a wrong turn or get lost. Negatively,
gates must be open; positively, capacities must be developed as
agents are empowered to select amongst realistic or challenging
options. We know well the sort of blocks to autonomy that our
fellows can meet. Parents may project their own ambitions on to a
docile child and go to their grave unsuspecting that their doctor
son hates his patients and his profession. Schools may go about
their business educating their charges to be the workforce of the
mine or mill, long after the mills and mines have closed, unsuspecting of the talents they ignore and so fail to foster. The conformist
traditions of a well-disciplined community may induce social
paranoia in otherwise generous and outgoing souls. And states,
following the middle road to electoral success and hence pandering to perceived majorities, may suffocate what Mill called
experiments in living. The widespread achievement of a sufﬁcient
measure of even that modest variety of autonomy I have described
requires a tolerant public ethos as well as strong liberal institutions. It should not be authority’s grudging tribute to mankind’s
natural bloody-mindedness.
‘A poor life, but mine own’ characterizes the sort of autonomy a
society can realistically aspire to on behalf of its members. It need

95

LIBERTY

not educate them to be career planners of business school proportions. Does this do justice to the generous liberal ideal? Is this a
morally worthy goal?
It must be confessed that it falls short of one well-known model –
that of the life organized around an individual ideal.39 Ideals of the
sort I have in mind may be thought to give meaning to the lives of
their proponents and hence, though they do not prescribe universal ends, they do have a moral tinge to them. Any account of the
phenomenon of ethics which ignored them would be incomplete.
Thus we might admire a life devoted to public service or religious
devotion. We may recognize as worthy practices of asceticism and
stoical self-discipline. A life devoted to art, as practitioner or as
connoisseur, may command a similar respect in many quarters.
And we should not ignore the value of loyal domesticity. Such
ideals fade into pursuits which may be equally demanding but are
barely ethical except perhaps for their display of executive virtues
– intelligence, foresight, resolution, indeed many items on Mill’s
list of distinctive human endowments. Thus one may be fully committed to a career or a club, or both together in the case of political advancement. We see the shadow of asceticism in the pursuit
of good health, organic vegetables, personal trainers and the like.
We are well used to the idea of lifestyle choices, having glossy
embodiments of them paraded daily in newspapers and magazines.
Respect for autonomy demands acceptance of others’ devotion
to a range of moral ideals to which one may not subscribe – and to
which one may be hostile. (I shall discuss the issue of toleration
later.) But the pursuit of an autonomous life need not involve such
all-consuming aspirations. Self-realization need not be so strenuous an exercise as liberals have portrayed it.40 An autonomous life
single-mindedly engaged in the pursuit of a great ideal evidently
requires appropriate freedoms – but so does that species of autonomy which is displayed in less exalted enthusiasms, stampcollecting or bird-watching, perhaps, or a range of enthusiasms
conducted by Jack-of-all-trades. So, too, does the unsettled and
wide-ranging pursuit of fancy, trying this and that as a means of
occupying leisure time, a different evening class every winter, none
producing true mastery. In each case we ﬁnd humans balancing,
compromising or sacriﬁcing conﬂicting demands on their active
attention and fashioning a life out of the debris.

96

LIBERTY

On my account freedom is justiﬁed as instrumental to the
worthy activities it permits and as the necessary precondition of
an autonomous life. Why is autonomy a good? We shall have more
to say on this question when we discuss rights in the next chapter.
But as a hint to my way of responding to it, I invite readers to
consider whether or not, after due deliberation, they desire it and
believe, in consequence, that the demands of others for it should be
respected. If this question seems too abstract, focus on the denial
of autonomy, and consider whether you are averse to that in its
characteristic manifestations. If your philosophical temperament
inclines to a more ambitious and more soundly anchored way of
thinking, you will see autonomy as a jewel, as expressive of mankind’s rational will, the transcendent capacity to reach beyond the
trammels of our natural state towards a spiritual, even Godlike
facility of self-creation.
If so, a Philosophical Health Warning should be issued. Think of
the man who is mistaken. He believes that humans should adopt
something akin to the sexual lives of pygmy chimpanzees. He
accepts the Freudian story about infantile sexuality and believes
that children are a legitimate target of his desires. He accepts that
his community excoriates his attitudes and so takes them underground. Gathering appropriate degrees and diplomas, he works his
way into positions of responsibility, say, manager of a children’s
home, and expresses his sexuality by the physical and mental
abuse of the children in his care. He then lives a life of appropriate,
careful, pleasure. Absent of any considerations about the sources
of his sexual appetites, this is an autonomous life – indeed it is
unusual in respect of the cleverness and forethought that has been
invested in its plan. Is this a model of the good life?
It would be, if the executive virtues were all that is necessary for
its success. A denser exhibition of the executive virtues would be
hard to ﬁnd, excepting the prescient politician I described above.
Still, we should accept that autonomy, without its Kantian overtones of sound moral judgement, may be the source of the greatest
evil. There are two ways forward here: either we can moralize
the notion of autonomy so that the autonomous agent does no
wrong (the Kantian route) or we can accept the possibility of
autonomous evil.
We should stick fast to the insight that freedom is a good. In

97

LIBERTY

which case, we should modify our understanding of autonomy or
accept that its connection with freedom is contingent. If autonomous action can be evil, freedom cannot be vindicated as the
expression of an autonomous will. If we take the Kantian route,
we need to say more about autonomous action to disbar the possibility of autonomous wrong-doing. Why not return to our sources
in Rousseau, try to work out what moral liberty requires and
develop a more robust theory of positive liberty?
Moral freedom
On Rousseau’s account, this is the freedom which is attained by
those who can control their own desires. It is developed further in
Kant’s account of autonomous willing which stresses how we
bring to bear our resources of rational deliberation in the face of
our heteronomous desires, those desires which we are caused to
suffer by the nexus of our (internal) human nature and (external)
nature. If we follow reason’s guidance we shall act freely, willing
actions which it must be possible in principle for all to accomplish,
laws which all must be able to follow. Kant’s account suggests to
many a strenuous form of moral athleticism; actions of moral
worth are the product of a continuing internal struggle wherein
agents wrestle with temptation. ‘Do with repugnance what duty
commands’41 is one caricature of this style of morality.
Rousseau, writing before Kant, believed that this stern conception of duty expects too much of us. We are weaker creatures than
Kant believes us to be, not least because our moral natures have
been corrupted by the degenerate society which is the product of
human history. We do not have the personal resources to consistently act well. Perhaps weakness of will, exhibited through our
knowledge of what is right and our inability to achieve it, has
become a social malaise. We recognize that social remedies are
needed to cure what has become a social problem. This is the third
ideal of positive liberty canvassed above. The state, making laws in
accordance with the general will (of which more in Chapter 7)
provides the collective resource we require. In a society where subjects endorse the rules of the sovereign – for Rousseau, a direct
democracy – and accept that these should be backed by sanctions,

98

LIBERTY

citizens force themselves to be free by subjecting themselves
to a common discipline. They give themselves additional (prudential) reasons to behave well, recognizing their (and others’)
susceptibility to go astray.
We can see this sort of reasoning at work in the case of laws
which prohibit theft. Grant that I believe it is wrong to steal, right
to respect the private property of others. But I also believe that I,
along with many others would be severely tempted to steal if I
were hard pressed and could escape with impunity. On these
assumptions, I should have no objection to such a law, indeed may
welcome it as improving the likelihood that I shall act well. Furthermore, I recognize, as a property holder, that my freedom is
enhanced by the restrictions which such a law places on others. It
makes them less likely to interfere with the use I may make of the
property I own. My freedom is protected by laws which guard a
domain where my own decisions and choices are decisive. Selfinterested agents will look for a beneﬁcial trade-off between the
surrender of their own powers to take or use the property of others
and the augmentation of their own powers of self-protection which
the authority of the state can effect. Moral agents will see no loss.
Of course they welcome the limitation of the powers of others who
would inhibit their freedom but the surrender of their own powers
to do wrong is something they equally endorse.
This story, of autonomous agents, willingly and rationally subjecting themselves to the coercive powers of the state, will be
explored in Chapter 6, where we examine the grounds of political
obligation. For the moment, the lesson to be taken is that laws
which keep us and our fellow citizens on what we recognize to be
the straight and narrow path of duty do not infringe our liberty.
As Berlin saw clearly, this is a dangerous argument, and the
danger comes from two different quarters. First, there is the obvious threat that others may determine what our duty requires and
then regiment us to perform it. This danger is avoided so long as we
insist that the moral liberty which is achieved by state coercion be
the product of political liberty, of democratic institutions. The
second threat is that democratic majorities may get it wrong, proscribing under penalty of imprisonment and like measures of punishment activities which are innocent. Since the decisions of
democratic bodies do not of themselves constitute verdicts on

99

LIBERTY

what is or is not morally acceptable, this is a permanent possibility.
The pursuit of moral liberty may land us in political chains.
There are a number of complementary answers to this problem.
The ﬁrst is that we should buttress our speciﬁcation of the institutions which promote political liberty with some condition that sets
limits on the competence of the democratic decision procedures.
Mill’s harm principle sets out to do this, as do declarations of
human rights which are embedded in the constitution of the state
or which operate as supra-national conventions. The second, an
explicit implication of Mill’s principle, is a public recognition that
the wrongs which may be prohibited consistently with liberty do
not include wrongs which citizens may do to themselves alone –
this is the issue of paternalism. Both of these questions will be
taken up in what follows. The third issue is difﬁcult and concerns
the problem of toleration.
Toleration
If there can be such a thing as a liberal virtue, it is toleration. But,
as one commentator has said ‘it seems to be at once necessary and
impossible’.42 Toleration is necessary because folk who live
together may ﬁnd that there are deep differences between their
moral beliefs which cannot be settled by argument from agreed
premisses. It is impossible because the circumstances of deep conﬂict which call for the exercise of toleration are all too often
described in terms of the obtuseness and stubbornness of the conﬂicting parties. These differences, historically, have been of a kind
that causes savage conﬂict. The point of disagreement may seem
trivial to a neutral observer – is the bread and wine consumed at
the Eucharist the real body and blood of Christ transubstantiated
in the ritual or is it a representation? (I use this example because I
heard it used recently by an extreme Protestant bigot to establish
the metaphysical foundations of his duty to provoke and assault
Roman Catholics, kicking them for preference, especially after
soccer matches!) From disputes as arcane (to non-believers) as this,
moral disagreements swiftly follow. Moral disagreements are
always serious – I would say, by deﬁnition.
I want to approach the problem of toleration obliquely by

100

LIBERTY

looking brieﬂy at what I believe is a cognate problem – that of
weakness of will. There are severe (and ancient) philosophical
problems created by the phenomenon of weakness of will. How can
people know what is the best thing to do and then do something
else? The problem of toleration has a similar structure: How can
people know what is the wrong thing for someone else to do and
not stop it? Philosophers divide in respect of the problem of weakness of will. Some dissolve the difﬁculty by insisting that there are
no such cases. If you really knew what was the right thing to do,
you would do it. If you don’t do it, you don’t really know. Or you
really know, but somehow your knowledge is not engaged in the
decision you take. Your knowledge is overwhelmed by the power of
your emotions, by your passionate commitments. Or there is some
other story (e.g. you were drunk at the time) to explain why your
knowledge of what is best didn’t motivate you – and philosophers
are imaginative in coming up with the sort of stories necessary to
defend their theses.43 Opponents insist that it is still possible, once
we have discounted those cases where plausible stories may be
told, that a moral agent may recognize the right thing to do – and
then do something else.
Exactly the same structure of dispute can be unearthed with
respect to toleration. Toleration is appropriate when we cannot
expect to persuade someone with different views of the rights and
wrongs of an issue. No matter how strong our beliefs or convictions, no matter how deep our feelings of certainty, no matter how
articulate or eloquent our pleadings or how forceful our arguments, when we try to convince others we hit a brick wall. They are
wrong – but we don’t seem to be able to do anything about it.
They’re truly, madly, deeply, wrong but, as with the best of friends
who fall in love with absolutely the wrong person, we can’t get
them to see their error. In which case why don’t we just stop them
doing wrong? The doctrine of toleration insists that there are
cases where, for all our belief that others are acting wrongly, it
would be wrong for us to stop them. But what, other than a belief
that others are doing wrong, can ever be legitimate grounds for our
stopping them?
Historically, doctrines of toleration developed as a response to
the wars of religion in seventeenth-century Europe. It was discovered, the hard way, that whilst threats of death, torture,

101

LIBERTY

imprisonment and the rest may serve for a time to get people to
behave in ways they would otherwise resist, no amount of coercion
can command others’ beliefs. The very model of a ludicrous public
policy is that of ‘forced conversion’; read Browning’s poem ‘Holy
Cross Day’, the most sardonic poem in English, for an account of
the sentiments of Jews forced to attend an annual Christian sermon in Rome and watch a dozen of their company converted publicly to the true faith. (The Jews regularly surrendered up their
thieves and vagabonds to this silly ritual, on Browning’s account.)
We know that disputes of this order of seriousness generally
have their origins in religion. Or religion and ethnicity. Or religion
and sexuality. The modern form in which such problems arise is
often cast as the problem of multicultural citizenship.44 To
my knowledge, neither individuals nor tribes ﬁght about the permissibility of murder, though the religious doctrines to which they
subscribe may permit or require the death of unbelievers.
Toleration, as I have described it, requires one not to interfere in
conduct which one believes to be morally wrong. Why do we not
leap to the conclusion, in cases where we do not think that we
should interfere with the conduct of others, that we don’t really
believe it to be wrong? This thought, I believe, captures the liberal
instinct. Let us look at some standard cases.
Think of a state with majority and minority religions, or more
generally, one with religious divisions and where the power to
legislate is in the hands of one religious community alone. Should
the state tolerate those who do wrong in the minds of the legislators by breaking the dietary laws their religion prescribes? At
least one dimension to this issue, which can go proxy for many
other differences of religiously sanctioned morality, is whether the
question is a truly moral one at all. Brieﬂy, it may be argued that
morality has a universal dimension which is belied by one who
conceives its source to be an authoritative religious text. Of
course, the believer will afﬁrm the universal authority of the prescriptions – one can’t expect such problems to be so swiftly settled
– but the direction of the liberal argument can be easily grasped.
The question of toleration does not arise, it is suggested, since the
activities up for proscription are not truly wrong.
Consider similarly proscriptions on the travel or opportunities
to earn a living of some ethnic group. Again the problem does not

102

LIBERTY

arise for one who believes that one does no wrong who sits at the
front of buses or on park benches designated for others. Exactly
the same issue arises with respect to areas of sexual conduct.
Homosexuals, for example, will protest that it is an error (and
worse) to regard permissive legislation as tolerance since they do
no wrong.
In other areas of conduct, again, it may be mistaken to speak of
tolerance, with the clear implication that the permitted behaviour
is wrong. The point here may not be that one can conﬁdently deny
the immorality of the actions some would prescribe, but that the
moral issues are not clear. If one can see two sides to a question, as
may happen where one accepts that the moot behaviour is often
wrong but may sometimes be justiﬁed, we may have instances of
doubt inhibiting ﬁrm moral judgement. For many people, the
rights and wrongs of abortion are clouded in just this fashion. If
one does not believe ﬁrmly that such activities are wrong across
the board, one’s hesitancy may lead one to deny that toleration is
at issue. This is especially true where the complexities of the circumstances afford a privileged perspective on the immediate circumstances to the agent who proposes to behave in the controversial manner. In judging that it is best to leave the decision on
how to act up to the agents concerned, since they are in the best
position to work out the implications of what they are doing, again
one is claiming that tolerance is not an issue here.
Finally, and cases of this sort are akin to those where paternalism is an issue, there may be issues where the rights and wrongs of
the matter just are a matter of personal decision. It is not a matter
now of modesty, of leaving a decision to the person who can best
decide the question. Rather the point is that the individual agent
who is faced with the choice is the only person who can settle the
matter. It is not easy to ﬁnd examples which are not tainted by
extraneous considerations (or marked by the tracks of some other
philosophical agenda), but perhaps suicide and voluntary euthanasia are like that. Although in some cultures marriages are
arranged, the liberal is likely to believe no wrong is done by the
obstinate child who will not accept her parents’ directions, since
at bottom the right marriage partner is the one who is accepted or
selected by the aspirant bride. If we distinguish, in the manner
of Strawson, social morality and the individual ideal, we may be

103

LIBERTY

prepared to admit conﬂicting judgements with respect to conduct
which may be endorsed and criticized from the perspective of
different ideals. This may be an important site for identifying
both the legitimacy of some degree of moral relativism and a
correponding requirement of a measure of toleration.
Does this leave any cases of clear, generally acknowledged,
wrong-doing which agents should be permitted to perpetrate? I am
inclined to think, putting aside questions of moral duty to oneself
and the issue of paternalism, that the only cases will be those
where, as Mill insisted, proscription is too costly, where regimes
which impose sanctions would be too intrusive. This is evidently
true where the coercive regime is that of the state, less obviously
so where the interference envisaged are social mechanisms of
disapproval, disrespect or ostracism.
To conclude, we can see that modern nation-states exhibit striking differences of view concerning the acceptability or immorality
of a range of practices. This is the reality of multiculturalism in
all its dimensions. In the face of these differences and our knowledge of how easily they generate severe and historically longlasting conﬂicts, modern democratic citizens should be modest in
their claims to the sort of moral knowledge that may underpin the
persecution of one community of persons by another. We should
not be relativists about ethics of the stripe that insists that right
and wrong generally is simply a function of the given practices of
the communities of which different citizens ﬁnd themselves members. This exacerbates rather than solves the problem of conﬂict
wherever the parochial ‘morality’ makes claim to universal applicability. Far better that we be fallibilists when we recognize the fact
of deep differences. Personal or societal humility in the face of a
range of divergent prescriptions on how to live best is the strongest
constraint on democratic majorities.

Free states and free citizens
Thus far, I have examined a number of different theories or analyses of the nature of freedom and discussed several different
accounts of what gives freedom its value or explains its appeal. In
the rest of this chapter, I shall draw these strands together in a

104

LIBERTY

complex account of the institutional framework which freedom
requires. I shall organize this material around the insights of
Rousseau. His account assembles the core materials of the theory I
advocate, though we shall range beyond these sources in our
exposition.
In the state of nature, Rousseau tells us, our freedom derives
from our free will, our capacity to resist the desires which press us,
together with our status as independent creatures, neither subject
to the demands of others nor dependent on them to get what we
want. We shall, as contractors, be satisﬁed with nothing less than
that social state which best approximates to this natural condition.
Natural freedom is lost, but the thought of it gives us a moral
benchmark by which we can appraise (and, inevitably, on Rousseau’s pessimistic account, criticize) the institutions of contemporary society. In society, a measure of freedom can be
recovered along three dimensions: moral freedom we have already
discussed, democratic freedom and civil freedom remain to be
examined. I shall outline these in turn, departing from their
source in Rousseau’s work without scruple. We shall be systematizing many of the insights concerning freedom which have been
unearthed in our previous discussions.
Democratic freedom
Since I shall have more to say about democracy later, I shall limit
my discussion of it here. The essence of the case for democracy as
a dimension of freedom is simple: democracy affords its citizens
the opportunity to participate in making the decisions which, as
laws, will govern their conduct. For Kant, autonomous action consists in living in accordance with the laws which one has determined for oneself as possible for each agent to follow. Democracy
represents a rough political analogue of this model: freedom consists in living in accordance with laws one has created (alongside
other voters) as applicable to all citizens, oneself included.
Berlin, as we have seen, argued that democracy is a very different ideal to liberty – majority decisions can threaten liberty, as J.S.
Mill argued. It is a mistake to view this consideration, plausible
though it may be, as decisive.45

105

LIBERTY

The most obvious reason for rejecting it has the force of a tu
quoque objection. Any system other than democracy will deny citizens the opportunity to engage in an activity that many regard as
valuable. We know that many citizens are apathetic to the
opportunity of voting, but in a mature democracy many others are
keen to participate. They join political parties, paying an annual
subscription where necessary, they go along to meetings of their
local active group, they distribute leaﬂets and canvass support
during elections. This may or may not be in pursuit of an ambition
to hold ofﬁce in a representative system. Either way, this is a
respectable use of one’s leisure time. Others may opt for a less
onerous measure of political activity – voting at elections or referenda may sufﬁce. Some may have no interest at all in political
affairs, but for those who have, voting, minimally, and the life of a
professional politician, maximally, represent opportunities best
made available in a democratic system. The strictest negative theorist recognizes that laws which prevent the expression of political
opinions are limitations on liberty, as are laws which forbid
religious worship or group meetings. It is hard to see why one
cannot draw the same conclusion in respect of constitutional
arrangements which deny citizens the opportunity of acting in
ways characteristic of the democratic participant. Just as soon as
we focus on the kind of things politically motivated citizens wish
to do, we see that Berlin’s two questions ﬁnd the same answer:
political arrangements should permit the exercise of political
power by citizens who desire to take an active part in the control of
their state. They are free for two reasons: they engage in the activities which are decisive in respect of how they are governed, which
opportunities are granted and secured by law.
It has often been pointed out that the analogy between selfcontrol and the exercise of political power by participant voters is
weak in a modern democracy. Rousseau accepted that the degree
of political power exercised by participating citizens is in inverse
proportion to the size of the participant community. Modern
commentators have gleefully noted that this power may be
effectively nil.46 No single vote has been decisive in a British
parliamentary election this century.
Citizens who vote in large-scale elections may be wiser than
these observers. Even in the most attenuated representative

106

LIBERTY

systems some chance of a little power is available for those who
pursue it – someone has to be President or Prime Minister, after all
– but for most voters something other than a deluded ambition for
power motivates their visit to the polling booth. Voting offers participant citizens the opportunity to endorse both the system for
taking political decisions and the decisions which are the outcome
of the operation of that system. If the democracy is representative
in form, where enough other people wish to do so, they are free to
change the representatives and the government which they compose. Equally, the opportunity to abstain or spoil a paper offers one
the opportunity to protest the system and its works. In the same
way, however much a rigmarole the application of the Categorical
Imperative may be for Kant’s moral agent, its exercise is an insistence that putative moral principles must be subjected to her own
rational legitimation and cannot be the imposition of some
external authority. In the political sphere, as in the moral, there is
no shortage of claimants to this sort of authority. Democratic
activity gives us the chance to assert that we are free of them.
Democracy may be necessary to freedom, but it carries its own
distinctive threats. Can these threats be disarmed?
Civil liberty
So it is important that we tackle directly the question that concerned John Stuart Mill so strongly – to the point where he published On Liberty: What are the limits that may be placed upon
citizens who would interfere with the activities of their fellows,
most perspicuously by their legislative activities, but most powerfully perhaps by the social pressures which lead to conformity?
The account of liberty that I have given seems to place citizens at
the mercy of majorities which operate with a limited or controversial conception of the public good and which are activist in its
pursuit.
It is really important here to sort out the philosophical issues
from the practical problem. So far as the philosophical issues are
concerned, I am on the side of Rousseau. Citizens who value liberty and express this through their participation in democratic
institutions which liberty requires will, in all consistency, be

107

LIBERTY

reluctant to interfere in the lives of their fellows, whether by law
or less formal mechanisms. Their deep concern to establish institutions which empower everyone will make them cautious about
introducing measures which constrain individual choice. Accepting the necessity of democratic institutions and their associated
freedoms, valuing strongly the opportunities these afford for citizens to embody their various conceptions of the good life in constitutional and prescriptive laws, they will be hesitant to constrain
their own pursuit of these values. What makes it necessary for them
to countenance restrictions on their own law-making powers?
Nothing less than the thought that the values and sentiments
which they endorse may be insufﬁcient to accomplish the ends
they seek. To the rational man, it is a miserable thought that
others may defy the canons of rationality. Second-best rules may
be called for which mimic the rules of reason in the ends they
produce. So we ask claimants who cannot agree on the most reasonable rule of precedence to toss a coin – and produce some semblance of fairness. The political philosopher, likewise, has to
accommodate embarassing facts which suggest that the highest
standards of reﬂective conduct may not be endorsed by the community to which her arguments are addressed. Again this calls for
an articulation of the second-best solution. Just as we are prepared to approve external constraints on our own decision-making,
recognizing our vulnerability to temptation, so, too, must we be
prepared to adopt institutions which guard against the worst of
human folly. This is the place of the harm principle and other
limitations on the societal weaknesses which democracies may
reﬂect and amplify.
Mill’s harm principle
In practice, liberty requires that law-making institutions, together
with a society’s informal but effective coercive powers, respect
some limits of principle. The ‘one very simple principle’ which
John Stuart Mill recommended reads as follows:
that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually
or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of

108

LIBERTY

their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for
which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of
a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm
to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a
sufﬁcient warrant.47
An alternative principle requires institutions to respect the rights
of their citizens. This block on institutional powers may be embedded in constitutions, as that of the United States, and the guardianship of this check on the executive and various legislative
powers – from the President and Congress to mayors and town
meetings – is vested in an independent judiciary with powers
to review and strike down offending acts. I shall examine this
proposal later.
Let us return to Mill’s harm principle. We can see how it works;
it expresses a necessary condition on the legitimacy of proposed
interference, i.e. it details a test that proposals must satisfy. The
burden of proof is thus placed on those who would limit our liberty; they must show that the putatively illegitimate conduct
causes harm to others. It is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition
on the justiﬁcation of interference, Mill insists. He envisages
plenty of cases where actions of a given type may cause harm to
others, yet interference would be unwise. The costs of policing a
general law against breaking promises, for example, would be
excessive. Or perhaps the harmful conduct is of a type that promises incidental beneﬁt. Business practices which make competitors
bankrupt may be necessary elements of a system that is beneﬁcial
overall.
Mill’s condition has been widely criticized from the moment of
ﬁrst publication. We shall examine some of the leading criticisms
in due course. He made one indisputable error however, notably his
claim that the principle is a ‘very simple’ one. Simple it is not. In
the ﬁrst place, we need a more careful analysis of harm than Mill
himself provides. Recent literature supports two very different
proposals. Judith Jarvis Thomson48 defends a narrow conception
of harm which identiﬁes as core cases bodily and psychological
impairment and physical disﬁgurement. Distress – feelings of pain
and nausea, for example – is not harm, though it can cause harm,
psychological harm, notably. On this account, Jim is not harmed if

109

LIBERTY

his car is stolen or the money under his mattress is burnt. By
contrast, Joel Feinberg analyses harm in a much more capacious
fashion.49 Harm, as the term is employed in the harm principle, is a
setback or invasion of a person’s interest and the most characteristic interests are what he calls ‘welfare interests’, construed as
‘the basic requisites of a man’s well-being’.50 There is perhaps no
real dispute here; Feinberg’s notion of harm is constructed with
the defence of a harm principle in view, Thomson’s is not. The
implication is clear, though; if the harm principle is to operate as a
sharp constraint on legitimate government interference, the concept of harm which is employed should permit disputes to be settled concerning whether action is harmless or not. Feinberg shows
that this task is not easy. As ever, common sense needs sensitive
articulation and careful defence. Let us assume this task of
clariﬁcation can be accomplished – and move on.
Perhaps the most serious objection to the application of the
principle to the purpose it is required to serve concerns the ubiquity of harm. Any act, it is observed, does or may cause harm to
others.51 This claim is either wrong or misguided. Since there are
plenty of harmless actions (including, hopefully, my typing this
sentence) the burden of the objection falls on the thought that any
act may cause harm to others. If this were true, in the spirit of the
objection, then the harm principle would fail to achieve its purpose of demarcating, on the one hand, a legitimate area of social
interference and, on the other, a domain of personal decision
beyond the legitimate reach of coercive agencies. All activities
would be in principle liable to intervention and regulation.
What does the objector have in mind? Presumably, we are invited
to take an example of an ostensibly harmless action and then show
that circumstances may be described in which an action of that
type causes indisputable harm. Thus, as a rule no harm is done by
one’s throwing a stone in a pond, but is easy to imagine cases
where clear harm follows. The stone hits a diver who is just emerging from the water or it causes the water to rise to the critical
level where the next ﬂood will cause it to break its bank and ﬂood
the village or . . . The possibilities are endless. And so they are for
any candidate harmless action. We are invited to conclude that
actions of the type described are all possible objects of legislation.
The argument, as put, embodies a serious type–token confusion.

110

LIBERTY

(We talk about types in generalizations, thus ‘The corncrake is a
noisy creature, rarely seen nowadays though common last century’
describes a type of bird. ‘Theft goes rarely undiscovered’ describes
a type of activity. We speak of tokens when we speak of particulars, say e.g. ‘The corncrake in the hay-ﬁeld has raised three chicks’
or ‘The theft of my car was distressing’.) Actions are proscribed, by
law or positive moralities which have coercive power, as types, not
as tokens. Laws, and by implication, conditions which constrain
their legitimacy such as the harm principle, address types of
action rather than tokens, and so the issue to be considered by any
court Sally has to face will be: Was her action of such a type as is
proscribed by law? In the sort of cases described above, where
harm is caused, the questions to be asked by the legislative and
judicial institutions which review the details are, in the legislative
context: Should we prohibit stone-throwing into ponds or should
we rely on catch-all legislation covering negligence and putting
others at risk? In the judicial context, it would be surprising if
questions were raised concerning anything other than direct
inﬂiction of injury (perhaps the pond is a training area for divers)
or, again, negligence. In all cases, questions about the agent’s
knowledge of the likely effects and her consequent intentions will
be relevant.
So we shouldn’t see the harm principle as the bluntest of blunt
instruments. We should see it as operating, in the clearest case, as
a constraint on the sort of action descriptions which can feature in
legal or quasi-legal proscriptions. ‘Assault and battery’ is an obvious example of an action-type, tokens of which necessarily cause
harm. ‘Throwing stones into ponds’ does not have this property.
Obviously there are all kinds of action where the issue concerns
the likely incidence or probability of token actions causing harm –
too high, I assume, in the case of driving while drunk or at 50m.p.h.
in a built-up area. Where probabilities or threshold effects are
relevant, we encounter a grey area which no philosophical judgement can illuminate. Legislators and the sort of opinion-formers
who guide the application of unofﬁcial sanctions will have to
debate and negotiate a trade-off between liberty and the prevention of some incidence of harm. The liberal, by instinct, counsels
against panic measures. The timid press anxiety into legislative
service. Both do right when they focus on the facts of the matter

111

LIBERTY

concerning harm and the risk of harm – and this is what the harm
principle requires.52
One ﬁnal objection to the harm principle hypothesizes the possibility of harmless actions in respect of which there can be no
doubt that proscriptions and sanctions are appropriate. Gordon
Graham discusses a series of examples which he believes show that
the harm principle cannot work as the sole necessary condition.53
My variation on his theme is the case of the Dirty Dentist – a
familiar ﬁgure from the Sunday tabloids of my adolescence,
devoured in those days as the most explicit media of sex education.
The Dirty Dentist used to fondle the genitalia of patients whilst
they were under general anaesthetic for a ﬁlling, there being no
requirement that a nurse or assistant be in the room during the
treatment. On recovery, we presume, they were all ignorant of
the Dentist’s assault. Were the patients harmed by their service to
the dentist? Does the Peeping Tom harm the blithe and blissful
objects of his smutty attentions? Graham thinks not – but is in no
doubt that these activities should be prohibited. In which case we
have to ﬁnd grounds other than the harm principle for doing so. In
which case, the principle is neither a necessary nor sufﬁcient condition on the legitimacy of interference. Graham’s solution is to
advocate a principle of individual rights. When the dentist fondles
his patients, he invades their rights – to bodily integrity or privacy.
That is the substance of the case for making his conduct illegal,
not the false claim that he harms them.
I see three ways forward here. First, one might substitute the
Rights Condition for the harm principle as necessary to justify
intervention. To be legitimate, legislation which interferes with
citizens’ agency must prevent them violating the rights of others.
Second, one might supplement the harm principle, insisting that
justiﬁable legislation either prevent harm to others or protect individuals’ rights. (This is Graham’s proposal.) Third, the harm principle may be defended – in which case some argument will need to
be devised which establishes that harm is caused after all in the
cases discussed. My preferred solution would be the last, but the
argument will have to take a devious route. In brief, and to anticipate the conclusions of Chapter 4, I believe the ascription of rights
requires that we describe the interests of individuals which rights
claims typically protect. But since the violation of rights claims ex

112

LIBERTY

hypothesi invades speciﬁable interests, and since the invasion or
setback of an interest constitutes harm, rights violations will generally be harmful – in the relaxed sense that actions of this type
will tend to cause harm. The hard task in cases like those of the
Dirty Dentist or Peeping Tom will be that of vindicating the right
which is violated. Most readers, I suspect, will believe that this can
be accomplished, but philosophers should not take for granted the
success of the enterprise. There is work to be done, but when it is
done I think two jobs will have been done at the same time. Not
only shall we have justiﬁed the right which underpins the legitimacy of the proposed interference, we shall have described clearly
and fully the harm such interference prevents.
Supplementary principles
If the theorist who accepts some version of the harm principle
cannot accept all cases of rights violation as species of harm, the
principle will need supplementation in the way we have seen. Are
there any other principles which have been found appropriate to
justify the range of governmental and unofﬁcial interference?54 If
there are, these will operate as just-about-sufﬁcient conditions,
discounting the cost of legislation and enforcement. As described
they may or may not include the class of harmful actions, so they
may operate, if successfully defended, as a supplement to the harm
principle, working as conditions which are disjunctively necessary,
i.e. a full account of the necessary conditions for interference to be
legitimate will specify as proper cases that either harm is caused
or . . ., as the conditions are introduced. Three well-known candidates include moralism, an offence principle and paternalism.
Legal moralism
The legal moralist claims that interference is justiﬁed if it prevents immoral or wrongful acts. If this principle were acceptable,
we should note straight away that it would incorporate the harm
principle as I have explained it, since the harms which may be
legitimately prohibited are those types of harm which it would be
morally wrong to inﬂict on others. Clearly, in order to evaluate

113

LIBERTY

such a principle as a supplement (or alternative) to the harm principle, we need to ﬁnd a class of actions which are morally wrong
yet do not involve harm or the risk of harm to others. It is notoriously hard to ﬁnd any such class which can be demarcated with
conﬁdence.
Two sorts of case have been described. The ﬁrst concerns
actions the wrongfulness of which derives from self-harm or the
agent’s failure to comply with some duty that she holds to herself. I
shall discuss this later under the heading of paternalism. The
second sort has most often involved sexual behaviour, solitary or
consensual, which is somehow not respectable. Unmarried or
extra-marital sex, sex with contraceptives, homosexual relationships, sex with prostitutes, sado-masochism: the list of types of
sexual behaviour which have been deemed immoral, and impermissible by implication, is as endless as the varieties of expressing
human sexuality seem to be. If the behaviour is fully informed and
consensual, I take it that it is either harmless or a type of harm to
self. The thought that some sex is rational, all else irrational,
strikes me as ludicrous, unless the rationality is strictly means–
end and the end speciﬁed is such as the propagation of believers in
the true faith or heirs to the throne – as good examples as any of
rationality in the service of dangerous or cruel masters.
The only philosophical point at the bottom of all such suspicious prohibitions is the claim that communities are right to prohibit deviant (but, ex hypothesi, harmless) behaviour on the
grounds that conformity to standard practice is either necessary
for the survival of the community or integral to the very idea
of community itself. Thank God (he says, letting slip his liberal
credentials), both arguments can be strongly challenged.
The positive (actual) morality of any community comes all of a
piece, Devlin tells us.55 A ‘seamless web’, as his most prominent
critic put it, though Devlin gently demurred. It is a structure of
belief and practice which must remain intact if any society is to
succeed in its collective goals. If particular moral beliefs are challenged or speciﬁc practices undermined, the community can
respond by refuting the challenge or supporting the practice or, if
the challenge is successful, it can disintegrate. The stakes are
high. So high as to justify legislation which supports the practices
of common morality. Principles governing the acceptability of

114

LIBERTY

sexual behaviour will be among the components of this web – in
which case it will be otiose to ask what harm is or would be done by
any particular practice. It is enough to know that it is deemed
immoral.
Devlin’s position was effectively refuted by H.L.A. Hart,56 at
least to my satisfaction. In the ﬁrst place, he pointed out that Devlin’s argument may be taken as an a priori claim that a society is
constituted by its morality. If the morality of a society changes, so,
a fortiori, does that society. We now have a different society. But
that deﬁnitional claim is insufﬁcient to ground the claim that a
society may protect itself against change by the use of legal and
social sanctions. The newborn society, constituted by its altered
positive morality, may be an improvement on its predecessor.
Unless Devlin’s argument is underpinned by an (indefensible)
claim that all change is for the worse, the demise of the old and the
birth of the new may be cause for celebration rather than regret.
If, on the other hand, Devlin’s claim is substantial rather than
deﬁnitional, again it is open to challenge. At ﬁrst inspection, it
looks like an application rather than a refutation of the harm
principle. It works as a high-level empirical claim, a generalization
to the effect that the consequences of challenges to established
moral practices are invariably harmful. If this is true, it is something the harm theorist can willingly take into account. Indeed it
would comprise just the sort of information that must be taken
into account when assessing the harmfulness of practices. So the
next question is obvious. Do all changes in moral beliefs and practices cause harm to the point where immorality in general may be
proscribed? No sooner is the question put than we can see how
silly it is. Everyone is at liberty to select a ﬁrmly held, deeply
entrenched moral belief which was integral to the operation of a
speciﬁc society, yet which was clearly wrong (as well as damaging,
both to individuals and the society as a whole). ‘Some humans are
natural slaves’ is a good example. Hence the thesis, taken in full
generality, falls. The speciﬁc proposals for change which were the
occasion of Devlin’s lecture – reform of the law concerning homosexuality and prostitution, as recommended by the Wolfenden
Committee of 195757 – clearly require inspection in point of the
respective merits of the status quo and the suggested reforms. And
as Hart pointed out, we have to be willing to take evidence. We

115

LIBERTY

can’t defend restrictions on homosexual practices by citing Justinian’s belief that homosexuality is the cause of earthquakes. And
when we review the evidence, it will not be relevant to quote opinion polls recounting the population’s beliefs in respect of the
immorality of the conduct to be permitted. The apt questions
concern whether the practice which is up for assessment causes
harm.
The practical problem is perennial – Devlin’s views were published as a contribution to the debate provoked by the proposals of
the Wolfenden Committee and the courts themselves throw up
cases for decision with undiminished regularity. In 1986, the
United States Supreme Court upheld the law of the state of Georgia which criminalized sodomy.58 In a recent UK case, the House of
Lords upheld the convictions for causing bodily harm of men
engaged in consensual sadistic practices. But the Hart–Devlin
debate had been, to my mind, a rare example of a philosophical
question decisively settled. I should have known better. Devlin’s
thesis has re-emerged recently in more fashionable dress – that of
the communitarian.
One strand of modern communitarianism has been the claim
that the identity of the moral agent is constituted by social institutions of the community of which she is a member.59 The contours
of the good life are drawn by the speciﬁc pattern of proscriptions
and prescriptions which are embedded in such institutional
frameworks and the virtues and dispositions of character that are
inculcated in citizens. A member cannot disengage from her community without a serious loss of self; she cannot step back from the
principles which mark her community as an historically conditioned entity and appraise them from some other-worldly stance.
For the most part, our citizen is stuck with what she believes to be
right since the cost of independence of spirit is too great for
humans to bear. It follows that each community will be optimally
regulated by that set of rules and attitudes which members
endorse as distinctive of their way of living well. Some of these
rules – perhaps the most important to the ongoing life of the community thus constituted – will be embodied in legislation. Other
rules, perhaps equally important but not judged suitable for legislative enactment, supposing that this carries with it the burdens of
the criminal law (police, courts and prisons), will be enforced by

116

LIBERTY

unofﬁcial communal instruments. The implication of this position
(which, as Hart saw, elevates positive morality to the status of
optimal critical morality) is that a society may give practical legislative effect to whatever rules of conduct identify its distinctiveness, not on the basis that this distinctiveness is worth preserving
– from what stance could this be adjudicated? – but rather on the
grounds that its members can endorse no other.
Far be it from me to deny that humans can think in this fashion
about how their communities should be regulated. It is enough for
the purposes of this argument to note one odd feature of the scenario. It supposes that citizens are so integrated60 into the lives of
their communities that they cannot but endorse the moral rules
which deﬁne its collective (and their individual) identity. It therefore assumes an ethical homogeneity that is not to be found in
modern nation-states. Patently, some citizens’ identities are not
deﬁned by the moral rules underpinning the legislation which they
are campaigning to reform. Telling people they must obey a law is
one thing – the telling may carry authority. Telling people wherein
their moral identity consists, against their explicit disavowal, is
quite another. In some communities, we are voluntary recruits; in
others, the family and the nation-state notably, we ﬁnd ourselves
members willy-nilly. But no community has the ethical authority
to conscript us as moral team players in the face of our explicit
dissent. Dissenters and bloody-minded protesters can get things
wrong. The principles they advocate may be as evil or dotty as any.
But if we believe so, such descriptions will serve; we don’t need to
locate their error in a mistaken sense of their moral identity which
is witnessed in the mere fact that their principles differ from ours.
In ‘Liberal Community’, Dworkin parodies the communitarian
challenge in his claim that those who subsume sexual behaviour as
a collective interest of the political community must suppose ‘that
the political community also has a communal sex life . . . that the
sexual activities of individual citizens somehow combine into a
national sex life in the way in which the performances of individual musicians combine into an orchestral performance . . ’.61
Maybe ridicule is as good a weapon as any against those who
believe they have a legitimate interest in their neighbours’ sex
lives (as against being good old gossipy Nosey-Parkers). Still, there
are difﬁcult cases. I will mention one.

117

LIBERTY

In the wake of a massacre of schoolchildren in Scotland, legislation was introduced against the possession of hand-guns in the
UK. To many, the most impressive reason in favour of such legislation was that it marked a moral stand against an encroaching
ethos of permissible private use of deadly weapons. Of course, that
ethos is explicit in the defence of the culture of personal weapons
in the USA and is exported in the ﬁlms and TV programmes which
display (and sometimes glorify) their casual use. What there is of
such an ethos in the UK takes the form of an admiration for military exploits. Soldiers of the SAS protecting Queen and Country
are a more recognizable model in Britain than the homesteader
guarding the family ranch against rustlers and Red Indians. Politicians as well as private citizens were impatient of the pleas of
members of private gun clubs that their hobby could be so regulated as to effectively limit the risk of sporting weapons being illused. Legislation which amounted to an absolute prohibition was
claimed to be the only counter to an encroaching gun culture.
I confess I am disturbed by the thought that this amounts to
legislation which is driven by moral sentiments quite independently of the question of whether the forms of hand-gun use to be
banned are harmful. That much seemed to be explicit in the terms
in which some of the debates were conducted. ‘Cowboy morality
must stop somewhere in the Atlantic.’ ‘The ideals of the pioneer
and the frontiersman which seem entrenched in the American
suburbs must be kept out.’ This looks like morals legislation to me.
The rhetoric reads as a defence of traditional community hostility
to the use of personal ﬁrearms being shored up in the face of
insidious threats. If so, the liberal who advocates the test of harm
should not be sympathetic to it.
I ﬁnd I am as susceptible to this rhetoric as most of my compatriots have been – but am equivocal as to the reasons for it. After
all, the same exotic and alien morality is celebrated by the more
colourful variety of Country and Western fans who wear cowboy
uniforms, adopt curious nom-de-plumes (Hobo Harry, the Hombre
from Huddersﬁeld) and hold fast-draw competitions. Children can
buy pistols and even imitation automatic weapons – to be ﬁlled
with water. Everyone can see John Ford’s Westerns on the television set. Few complain about these innocent pastimes as the incursion of an alien morality and demand prohibition. The difference

118

LIBERTY

seems to be that legislation to ban hand-guns has some connection
with the distribution and use of dangerous weapons and some possible incidence of their harmful use. It cannot represent, simpliciter, a communal response to an alien ethos. But I leave readers to
think through these issues for themselves.
Offence
If we were to judge straight off that one is harmed who is offended,
offensive conduct could be considered for prohibition along the
lines suggested by the harm principle. How harmful is the offending behaviour? Does it harm few, many or most people? Remembering that the harm principle is not proposed as a sufﬁcent condition
on legitimate interference, we should consider if the harm which is
consequent upon the offence is offset by any countervailing beneﬁt, or if the costs of interference would in any case be too high. If
there is a difﬁculty in determining particular cases or in evaluating proposals for interference, the difﬁculty will be cognitive
rather than philosophical. It may be that the evidence germane to
these practical questions is hard to assess.
There is a philosophical problem here (for the proponent of a
harm principle) only if one believes that the offensiveness of
behaviour is a ground for restrictions independently of the harm
that it may cause. To examine this we need to take examples of
conduct which it is agreed is offensive and either harmless or
harmful in some attenuated fashion that would not generally serve
as a good reason for restricting liberty. Feinberg accepts that
Louis B. Schwartz has found an example.62 Consider a law whereby
‘a rich homosexual may not not use a billboard on Times Square to
promulgate to the general populace the techniques and pleasures
of sodomy’. I cannot believe that the harm done by such a billboard
is of a trivial kind, though the description of it may require a
delicate and imaginative exercise. The nuisance of the distraction,
the embarassment of the unavoidable encounter with feelings of
shame and perhaps guilt, the shock of unanticipated self-exposure
– all these on the way to work – may be reckoned harmful enough
and assumed to be sufﬁciently universal to justify prohibition. The
burden of proof of harm which is placed on those who would

119

LIBERTY

intervene is not onerous in such a case. When questions concerning the censorship of pornographic ﬁlms, TV programmes, books
or plays are raised, readers may recognize the relevance of
voluntary subscription. Those questions are not raised here.
As Feinberg insists, we should be reluctant to admit offence as a
defensible reason for interfering with the conduct of others, supplementary to the harm principle. And we should be careful of
applying the harm principle indiscriminately for its prevention. I
suggest that we think two ways on this issue. In the ﬁrst place,
offence is important to us. It is perhaps the most familiar way in
which we are wronged. Many philosophers have developed the
Kantian blunderbusses of respect for persons and recognition of
others’ autonomy – treat others as ends and not as means, merely –
into sophisticated instruments of normative ethics. They capture
core features of an individualistic ethics which is the legacy of
Protestantism and the moral philosophy of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. And these ethical notions in turn capture a
modern concern with the dignity of the individual, a dignity just
about all moral agents educated in this tradition will assert freely.
The arena in which these calls for respect are most readily made
and most frequently affronted is that of commonplace personal
interaction. Here, respect is a matter of courtesy and politeness;
disrespect is easily recognized. The barman who retorts to the
rude customer: ‘What do you think I am – a f***ing vending
machine?’, perhaps breaks a rule of good business, but expresses
clearly and directly a universal concern not to be treated as a
means merely. Jack is, or demands to be, as good as his master
nowadays and hierarchical honour codes have been ﬂattened out.
You’re due courtesy even in the pawnbroker’s shop, my father used
to insist. So everyone, quite rightly, is sensitive to affront, bristles
in the face of patronization, is quick to protect her dignity. So life
becomes difﬁcult where conceptions of what is and what is not
respectable conduct change rapidly. Who will be offended by what
in which circumstances in the way of bad language? Offence is
easily given and readily taken. Rudeness is a moral wrong; it is not
the sort of breach of etiquette committed by the ignoramus who
picks up the wrong knife, though as the example of bad language
shows, the boundary between the immoral and the infelicitous can
be tricky and quickly shifting. But if we wish to live a comfortable

120

LIBERTY

life in a gracious society we had all better be connoisseurs of such
distinctions. Of course, prevention of the sort of offence I have
been discussing is not easily legislated for, and generally is better
not, but this is a matter of practicalities. It is not because offence
is a trivial or unimportant wrong.
On the other hand, offensiveness may serve important ethical
and political purposes. In a moving defence of the rights of Salman Rushdie, when still under fatwa for the publication of The
Satanic Verses, Jeremy Waldron insists that ‘the great themes of
religion matter too much to be closeted by the sensitivity of those
who are to be counted as the pious’.63 Who is a proper party to the
debate as well as what counts as good manners may in themselves
be points at issue. I’ll quote Waldron at length; the issue merits his
eloquence:
The religions of the world make their claims, tell their stories,
and consecrate their symbols, and all that goes out into the
world too, as public property, as part of the cultural and psychological furniture which we cannot respectfully tiptoe around in
our endeavour to make sense of our being. . . . Things that seem
sacred to some will in the hands of others be played with, joked
about, taken seriously, taken lightly, sworn at, fantasized upon,
juggled, dreamed about backward, sung about, and mixed up
with all sorts of stuff. This is what happens in The Satanic
Verses. . . . Like all modern literature, it is a way of making
sense of human experience.64
Three cheers for this. In a multicultural society, as in a multicultural world, offensiveness cannot be avoided. We are stuck
between the rock of respect and appropriate courtesy and the hard
place of polemical ridicule. We strive to protect our dignity as
persons and then lampoon in literature and cartoons those
whose values we challenge. We don’t thereby violate our own
ground-rules of debate. Where the ground-rules themselves are the
question at issue, offence is ineliminable.

121

LIBERTY

Paternalism again
This covers the second ideal of positive liberty canvassed earlier,
embracing the idea that agents are liberated when the control of
others is substituted for the self-control they cannot manage.
Mill’s harm principle explicitly excludes activities whereby
individuals harm themselves from the range of acceptable social
interference. He states that the agent’s
own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufﬁcient warrant.
He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it
will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier,
because in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even
right.65
Later in On Liberty, following Mill’s introduction of a distinction
between self- and other-regarding actions, cases in which the only
harm that the agent causes is to himself are ﬁrmly placed in the
category of the self-regarding, and the interference of others,
whether by means of law or other coercive social agencies, is
severely proscribed. This restriction is not universal. Uncontroversially, Mill insists that he is not speaking of children. More
generally, those ‘who are still in a state to require being taken care
of by others, must be protected against their own actions as well as
against external injury’. Notoriously, this disclaimer includes barbarians stuck in ‘those backward states of society in which the
race itself may be considered in its nonage’.66 An example or two of
appropriate paternalism towards uncivilized members of barbaric
societies would help explain the point, but I am ﬂummoxed. Just
what practices of ignorant self-harm does he want to stop? Consensual suttee as practised in India is a possible candidate. Bear in
mind, as some critics have not, that he is not anticipating the dubious claim of twentieth-century tyrants that freedom of speech, for
example, limits the growth of gross national product.
To focus enquiry, let us list the leading characteristics of paternalistic interference and then give some examples. First, it will be
coercive, exacting penalties in case of non-compliance. Hortatory
messages of the sort put out by Ministers of Health (Take daily
exercise!) may be paternalistic in spirit but they do not count for

122

LIBERTY

the purposes of this discussion since they do not amount to compulsion and control, to echo Mill. If governments could brainwash
their citizens into looking after themselves better, that would
count as paternalism, as does any policy which is intended to force
all citizens to ameliorate their condition. Fluoridization of the
water supply, as a strategy to improve everyone’s (not just children’s) teeth, would be an example. Second, the main purpose of the
interference must be to prevent citizens harming themselves. If the
intention of seat-belt legislation is to cut the costs of hospital
treatment following road accidents, it is not paternalistic. If the
desired effects of restrictions on smoking concern the comfort
and good health of non-smokers, again the interference is not
paternalistic.
Something like the law of double effect will be operating here,
since in cases of this sort, those who are made to wear their seatbelts or limit their smoking reduce to some degree the likelihood
of harm to themselves. And mention of the law of double effect
should alert liberals to the possibility of hypocrisy. There are
whole armies of folk desperate that others improve themselves and
unconcerned that the objects of their sympathetic attention may
balk at their mission. If, in the pursuit of their goal they can sneak
their favoured proposals into the category of legitimate interference by the back-door citation of any small probability of harm to
others, they will leap on the evidence to whitewash the coercion
they believe to be warranted in any case.
Mill’s instincts were sound; if the effects to be prevented can be
inhibited by some other means less intrusive on the citizen’s freedom, if drivers, for example, could be got to pay a premium on their
insurance policies to cover the additional costs their choice of not
wearing a seat-belt might impose on others (and if this option
could be effectively enforced), one who goes down the route of
universal coercion is acting in a paternalistic fashion. All too
often, the intentions of would-be interferers is occult. Those who
would manipulate our conduct willy-nilly are not likely to restrain
their manipulation of the terms of the debate. Although paternalism is a characterization of the intentions or purposes of the interferer, those who oppose paternalism, as Mill did, have to identify it
solely in terms of the likely effects of proposed policies, and the
readiness of the proposers to consider alternatives. In any policy

123

LIBERTY

debate which raises the spectre of paternalism, motives which are
properly recognized as suspicious can rarely be challenged directly. Double-talk abounds, as well as double standards.
Here is a list of practices which have invited do-gooders to intervene on behalf of their benighted fellows: masturbation (doctors
used to propose clitoridectomy for women self-abusers, and all
manner of restraint for men), dangerous sports (boxing, notably,
but never to my knowledge high-altitude mountaineering which
until recently carried a one-in-nine chance of death per climber
per expedition), gambling, smoking, drinking and drug-taking, eating ox-tail stew or T-bone steaks, driving cars without seat-belts,
riding motorcycles without crash-helmets, suicide and consensually assisted euthanasia, incarceration of adults of unsound mind
and prone to self-mutilation and injury. I have deliberately mixed
up the daft, the controversial and the not-so-controversial, so as to
prompt reﬂection amongst readers.
We know the form of the case that has to be made out for paternalistic interference because we ﬁnd it readily justiﬁable in
respect of children. When we lock the garden gate to prevent our
children playing with the trafﬁc, we suppose they are ignorant of
the degree and likelihood of the danger. Or, if we have explained
this carefully, we believe them prone to misjudgement in their
evaluation of the likely costs and beneﬁts. We insist that children
attend school and force them to take nasty-tasting medicine. We
prevent them harming themselves in the ways that their ignorance
or poor judgement permits. As children mature, sensible parents
allow them to take more decisions for themselves. Mistakes will be
made, but one hopes that these will encourage the adolescent to
develop the capacities necessary for prudence – a curiosity about
the future effects on themselves of their conduct, the intelligence
to investigate what these may be, sound judgement concerning the
beneﬁts of risky activities. These skills need to be cultivated
through increasing the opportunities for their exercise. Then, hey
presto, somewhere between 13 and 21 years of age, depending in
most jurisdictions on the activity in question, adults emerge with
the capacity to decide for themselves how best to pursue their own
interests with whatever risk of harm to themselves.
At adulthood or thereabouts, there is a presumption that individual agents are in the best position to judge these matters – a

124

LIBERTY

presumption we shall examine in due course. We suppose that
grown-ups are in possession of all information germane to their
decisions, but if this is arcane or technical, governments strive to
make it widely available, to the point, as with tobacco smoking,
of hitting folks over the head with it on every occasion of consumption. ‘Preappointed evidence’ was Bentham’s term for this
useful practice, approvingly cited by Mill.67 We also suppose that
grown-ups can evaluate the beneﬁts of a risky activity, can
achieve a reasonable measure of the worthwhileness for themselves of the sort of life they set about. Here there is less scope for
preappointed evidence; the attractions of high-altitude mountaineering are likely to be a mystery to non-participants, not least
to those who make some effort to comprehend them by reading
the grim accounts of the activity which the mountaineers themselves provide – ﬁve weeks of hell-on-earth, then one beautiful
sunset.
Is this presumption reasonable? With respect to the provision of
information concerning the degree and probability of harm, countries like the UK with compulsory education to the age of 16, supplementing the advice of parents who for the most part wish their
children to be safe, have plenty of opportunities for putting over
appropriate messages. For the adult, preappointed evidence is ubiquitous as sports stars queue up for TV opportunities to convince
us of the beneﬁts of walking to work, and government health
warnings are printed on billboards. Interestingly, Mill thought
this principle should apply, too, to the dangers of drugs and poisons – as indeed it does, with appropriate doses and information
concerning contra-indications being supplied with prescribed
drugs. But ‘Doctor Knows Best’ is a safer policy for the majority of
us who are pharmacologically challenged. Mill thought that ‘to
require in all cases the certiﬁcate of a medical practitioner would
make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses’.68 Most contemporary readers will regard
this as a prescription for a National Health Service, with readily
available services free or cheap at the point of delivery, rather than
a justiﬁcation of self-prescription.
Matters are very different concerning the value of risky activities. Here, perforce, societies must leave most adults unprepared.
Again, the example of mountaineering is instructive. Schools and

125

LIBERTY

families can give children a taste of the experience, but this will be
diluted in homeopathic proportions; taking children on mountains
is not like a trip to the ballet. Risk, at least for the schools and
public authorities who regard their involvement as educational,
must be excised as far as possible; no wonder the glories are obtuse
to the many who cannot imagine what the free and self-directed
pursuit may be like.
Further difﬁculties concern activities whose point is forever
opaque to non-enthusiasts. At least in the case of mountaineering,
society has cast the gloss of adventure over the game, and the
culture of stoicism and self-knowledge promises a glimmer of
imaginative identiﬁcation, though aspirants will probably ﬁnd the
outcome disappointing. But think of train-spotting, beetlecollecting or playing dominoes!69 If one doesn’t do these things,
how can one appreciate their value? Mercifully, the question of
paternalism does not arise here since the hobbies I have mentioned
do not generally harm their practioners. But what, for example, do
we innocents make of the life of the alcoholic or drug-taker? I read
William Burroughs’s Junkie 70 as an advertisement for the liberated
existence of the heroin addict. There is no conventional vice which
does not have, or may not ﬁnd, its literary, or theatrical, or painterly celebrant of self-destruction. If the glory of seeing a steamdriven Britannia class locomotive, charging down the line, is
utterly opaque to us, what chance do we have of imagining the
transcendent effects of a shot of heroin?
There is a respectable answer to this question. At the point of
experimental choice, there can be more or less commitment. A
decision to try the heroin may be the cause of one’s foregoing
future acts of choice.71 It is unlikely that the sight of Britannia
herself or the exhilaration of winning a clever game of dominoes
will prove addictive. I guess it wouldn’t matter if heroin addiction
were as harmless as the universal human addiction to fresh air.
But, at least in the dismal circumstances in which this addiction is
generally pursued, it is hard to think of addiction as a worthy
lifestyle choice as opposed to the dreadful consequence of an
ignorant or careless mistake. Hard, but not impossible – which
alternative signals the difﬁculty of paternalist intervention. It is a
just about universal feature of human society that its worst features (extreme poverty, homelessness, loneliness) have prompted

126

LIBERTY

personal strategies of self-oblivion which can be presented as perfectly rational in the awful circumstances.
It might be thought that paternalism, given the hostility to it
which I have intimated, poses a particular difﬁculty to the account
of liberty I have been developing. I argued, following Locke and
Rousseau and, in modern times, Joseph Raz and Philip Pettit, that
our liberty is not enhanced by the opportunity to do evil with
impunity. In fact, concern for our moral liberty may lead us to
endorse social constraints on our actions as the most effective
means of self-discipline. From this point of view, one might judge
that even laws which directly prevent harm to others, laws against
theft, for example, have a paternalistic tinge if they are viewed as
the outcome of citizens’ desire that their resolve be bolstered in
the face of temptation. This line of thought will positively encourage paternalistic interference, since it is predicated on a belief in
its necessity.
I insist that the problem is not as severe as it appears. In the ﬁrst
place, this element of a theory of liberty must be placed alongside
an insistence on a measure of political liberty as promoted by
democratic institutions. Paternalistic interferences which are the
product of rulers imposing their values on hapless citizens – as
parents might regulate the conduct of their children – are not
justiﬁable. The institutions of political decision-making must
make it intelligible that citizens are imposing these limitations on
themselves, however remote or indirect the mechanisms.
For some, the introduction of democracy onto the scene will
make matters worse. Wasn’t it the illiberal, tyrannical even, tendency of democratic egalitarianism to make everyone’s lives their
neighbours’ business (and to put this prurient concern into social
effect) that Mill noticed from de Tocqueville’s writings on America
which prompted him to write On Liberty ?72 Don’t both democratic
institutions and the democratic temper encourage intrusive paternalistic practices? I am prepared to admit that they might. The
sensitive liberal ear burns daily at the rhetoric of elected politicians who are desperate to keep their fellows on the straight and
narrow to their evident beneﬁt.
To some, this seems to be how they interpret the pursuit of the
public good that they were elected to serve. No sooner are local
councillors elected (on platforms such as reducing unemployment

127

LIBERTY

or protection of the environment) than they enthusiastically set
about censoring ﬁlms, sitting on licensing committees and regulating the opening hours of clubs that young people attend. It never
occurs to them that these matters may not be their proper business.
Just this morning I heard a government (Home Ofﬁce) minister on
the radio announcing solemnly that a new system of on-line lotteries to be played in pubs represented a serious danger to the moral
health of the nation. It must be investigated! The combination of
alcohol and gambling is reprehensible and dangerous (everywhere,
presumably, except the Royal Enclosure at Ascot). At no point in
the discussion was the suggestion made that this sort of activity is
outside the remit of government authority, that it represents an
opportunity for pleasurable individual misbehaviour which should
be immune to interference.
On the other hand, that democracies have developed in this
intrusive fashion does not entail that they either must or should do
so. Philosophical argument cannot of itself prevent the misuse of
institutions – and even Mill’s harm principle is just that: a philosophical principle. It is not a brick wall whereby households can be
fenced off from their neighbours and all the coercive instruments
of society at large. So we can insist, on the basis of a theory of
liberty, that those who love liberty will not treat their fellow citizens as imbeciles whose lives are to be managed so as to prevent
them harming themselves. In particular, having assured themselves that grown-ups have where possible all the information they
need to make prudent choices, they will be cautious about restricting their fellows’ engagement in risky activities since they will be
humble about their own capacities to discern what good these
activities serve. The democratic citizen who values liberty knows
full well the difference between asking, of herself: Is this activity a
temptation that I wish the state to assist me in controlling? and
asking, in respect to others: Is this an activity that I wish to stop
them pursuing? It is one lesson of Rousseau’s doctrine of the general will, of which more later, that genuine democratic institutions
require their participants to think along particular tracks. It is
because he believes he addresses an audience who value liberty
that he cannot accept that its members will violate each other’s
rights.
Finally, although we must acknowledge some space for paternal-

128

LIBERTY

istic interference, we must insist that this does not give carte
blanche to interfere to even the most straight-thinking, soundvalued state. Suppose I am correct to believe that I need the help of
others if I am not to harm myself in ways I deplore but cannot
avoid and I accept that self-discipline, on my part, requires social
engagement. If one is alert to the facts of history concerning ambitious state projects of individual amelioration, projects ranging
from Prohibition and temperance legislation to the War on Drugs
(led in the UK at the moment by a Drug Czar!), one will recognize
that the state is very good at creating criminals and not very good
at changing their behaviour.
As we noticed before, we should worry about the effects of government interference, even where it is legitimated by the harm
principle. First, it’s likely to be inefﬁcient, as claimed above; second, where it is efﬁcient, we should consider the enervating effects
of big government on the spirit and liveliness of the citizens.73
Family, friends, self-help groups, churches even, represent better
resources for the weak-willed than the agencies of the state. If the
state has a role in enabling its citizens to conduct their lives in
less self-harming ways, this duty may best be discharged, almost
paradoxically, by state support of non-governmental agencies.

Conclusion
There have been times when philosophers radically circumscribed
their task. In the middle years of the twentieth century, some
claimed, modestly, that the analysis and articulation of concepts
was the proper task of philosophers, the limit of legitimate philosophical ambition. In this period, amongst these philosophers, it is
fair to say that political philosophy suffered grievously, although
the clarity and precision of this work affords an example of best
practice in point of style, if not philosophical methodology. Berlin’s work on liberty represented a notable advance on the prevailing standards of philosophical correctness. He showed that an
important ethical concept is susceptible of (at least) two, and possibly two hundred, different analyses. There is no one coherent
way of thinking about liberty; there are at least two – and these
amount, each of them, to rich traditions, each tradition dissolving

129

LIBERTY

into disparate components which challenge fellow contenders for
the torch of ‘the best way of thinking about the value of liberty’.
As we have seen, Berlin has been criticized for the exclusiveness of
his categories. Talk of ‘negative’ and ‘positive’ liberty occludes an
underlying schema into which all mentions of liberty may be ﬁtted.
MacCallum’s point may be taken as a legitimate demand on putative analysis, but Berlin’s real purpose was to demonstrate the
costly ethical commitments of one analysis against another –
where each alternative satisﬁes the test of conceptual coherence.
If there are many ways of thinking clearly about liberty, as about
democracy or justice, the important question concerns which way
we are to select as most apt to characterize judgements about the
importance of liberty as a political value. Which analysis, amongst
the two (or twenty-two) available, best illuminates why so many
people think liberty is worth striving for? The account I have been
developing is complex – and these are its chief constituents.
Basically, agents are free when they are not hindered in their pursuit of what they take to be the good life. Hindrances are to be
construed widely. In a political, or more widely social context,
they will include laws backed by sanctions as well as the coercive
instruments of positive morality. But individuals can also claim to
be unfree when governments in particular fail to empower them in
sufﬁcient measure to attain levels of accomplishment which are
the necessary preconditions of a life which is authentically their
own. In insisting that the object of liberty should be the pursuit of
the good life, I mean to exclude from the value of liberty opportunities to do evil. I mean to include, not merely the wherewithal to
pursue exalted ideals, but also the possibility of fashioning an
autonomous track through the conﬂicting demands of various
loyalties, interests and commitments. Political institutions can
foster liberty on this capacious understanding in a range of ways.
Democracy is necessary since for many a life of active political
engagement is an important ingredient of the good, intrinsically a
component of self-directed existence, as valuable in its fashion as
the religious life or the life of artistic creation or appreciation.
Democracy has instrumental importance since it enables the fastidious citizen to construct or embrace coercive measures which
impose some discipline on her pursuit of worthwhile goals – where
the imposition of such controls is a necessary supplement to her

130

LIBERTY

solitary strivings. Whether such constraints are necessary is a
matter of personal moral strength, but even where they are
not, coercion is still necessary to fashion a space for unhindered
activity secure from the interventions of others.
A sound theory of liberty should recognize the Janus-face of the
criminal law in particular. It can serve as a protection, demarcating with the force of sanctions the boundaries which freedom
requires if the pursuit of the good life is to be safe within them.
Equally, though, and just as obviously, such laws can limit liberty,
as they do when the prospect of punishment makes forbidden pursuits too costly to contemplate. If such pursuits are innocent or
necessary for a worthwhile life, the law is acting as a limitation on
freedom.
We have claimed that democracy is a necessary condition of political freedom, but as the author of coercive laws it is also a threat.
And perhaps de Tocqueville was right: democratic legislatures, in
their representative form through the operation of the mandate,
are prone to operate capriciously in the lives of citizens, legislating to solve social problems without a thought as to whether intervention in speciﬁc areas of conduct is their proper task. To deal
with this problem of overbusy legislation, as well as to curtail a
society’s moral instincts for self-repression, limits have to be
drawn to the competence of agencies with the capacity to curtail
agents’ freedom. The most familiar ways of doing this are through
the applications of principles which may or may not be given constitutional entrenchment. Mill’s harm principle is one such; a
principle of protected rights is another. This may be thought an
alternative to the harm principle or else as a supplement to it.
Other candidate principles have been examined, including principles of legal moralism and offence. I have argued that these are
not independent principles. Either they are defective or best taken
as appeals to the relevance of speciﬁc types of harm. The most
difﬁcult cases for the harm principle concern paternalistic interference. Here the concern to prevent agent’s harming themselves
cuts across the value of autonomy which is the deepest justiﬁcation of free institutions. Formally, there is something odd about
the application of a principle of autonomy to justify coercion. It
may be necessary where a measure of coercion establishes the
social conditions necessary for an autonomous life to be engaged –

131

LIBERTY

as with children. With adults the situation is altogether different.
Governments and citizens individually should be modest in respect
of both their ambitions and effectiveness concerning the likelihood of their interference promoting the good of their helpless
and obdurate fellow citizens.

132

Chapter 4

Rights

Introduction
Nowadays the rhetoric of human rights seems to be just about
universal. No tyrants, no autocracy, seem to be so benighted that
they refuse, in public at least, to endorse the claims of human
rights. In practice they may jail or torture political opponents, or
refuse to educate women, but when applying for aid to the United
Nations they will give solemn assurances that human rights are
respected in their jurisdiction, respected at least as far as is practical under conditions of emergency, respected at least in point of
intent: that when the current crisis has been alleviated, normal
conditions will be swiftly resumed. ‘Normal conditions’, of
course, will comprise the promotion and protection of a standard
list of human rights. The ‘standard list’ is likely to be provided by
the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights or
the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights. If
any political principles have been elevated to the pantheon of
political correctness, to the point where denial of them taints the

133

RIGHTS

innocent philosophical sceptic, human rights have. This makes it
all the more important that we examine their philosophical
credentials.
Human rights have acquired a quite unique standing amongst
political values, partly as a consequence of this ofﬁcial international recognition. Initially, they could be easily listed – rights
to life, liberty and property. In the American Declaration of
Independence, ‘the Pursuit of Happiness’ was included; The
Rights of Man as declared by the French Revolutionary Assembly
incorporated rights to liberty, property, security and resistance to
oppression. In the United Nations Charter and the European Convention, the so-called social and economic rights have been
included, rights to health, education, welfare provision and much
else. The call for rights has overstepped even these capacious
boundaries, to the point where readers will encounter demands
that a previously unheard-of human right be recognized just about
every time they open a newspaper. The infertile claim a human
right to give birth and the fertile claim a human right to abortion.
The practice of installing prepayment meters for water has been
denounced in the UK as the violation of the human right to a
mains water supply.
Such claims may be made to sound silly. Sometimes they are.
Most often, they suggest that their claimants are deriving the
legitimacy of the demands they make or the illegitimacy of the
practices they denounce from more general principles of rights.
Either way the language of rights has become ubiquitous.
In the comfortable West, at least, a cynical reason for this may
be offered – a reason that I don’t feel qualiﬁed to assess. Cold
War warriors, it has been suggested, feared the obvious attractions
of communist ideology to the poor and starving of this world,
for much the same reason that nineteenth-century British politicians feared calls for the extension of the franchise: calls for the
end of private property as we know it invite the poor to trespass
and help themselves. An alternative ideology was necessary to
combat this malign doctrine and the theory of human rights ﬁtted
the bill nicely. Citizens of the West, it is suggested, have come to
believe the propaganda of their own governments. Criticisms
which are expressed in terms of a denial or violation of human
rights have acquired a distinct potency. For all these reasons, it is

134

RIGHTS

urgent that the political philosopher investigates closely the
notion of human rights.

Analysis and definition
Preliminaries
The language of rights is lumbered with jargon – no bad thing if it
serves a clear technical purpose. But the jargon has to be
explained and clariﬁed, and the task can be as nit-picking as any
that philosophers have devised. Let us get down to it.
Our main focus will be on rights which are universal, universally
claimed or universally ascribed, rights of the form that, if anyone
has them, everyone does. These will be what the French declared to
be the Rights of Man; often they have been described as natural
rights. Hegel, for reasons I will return to later, called them
abstract rights. The term ‘human rights’ is best, for two reasons:
ﬁrst, it connects with the language of the charters, declarations
and conventions mentioned above which inscribe rights as a principle of international law. For better or worse, it is human rights to
which these documents refer and so it is human rights that citizens
claim against their governments. Second, the older term, natural
rights, carries with it a distinct provenance. Natural rights, to
simplify, were deemed natural because they were the product of
natural law. What is natural law?1 To many, it represented that law
which God had prescribed as apt for creatures with natures like
ours, those rules which God had determined that humans should
follow if they are to fulﬁl the purposes He had laid down for them.
If humans cannot be expected to fulﬁl their prescribed purposes
unless they respect each others’ claims of right, we have an argument that natural law sanctions natural rights. In a nut-shell, this
is Locke’s argument for natural rights.
It is a good argument, too – so long as one accepts the theological premisses. We cannot imagine how humankind might be
the trustees of God’s purposes without God granting them the
necessary wherewithal, the moral space and essential resources
required for their accomplishment. If God’s prescription of the
moral space of rights is necessary for His subjects to fulﬁl His

135

RIGHTS

purposes, this severe injunction must bind not only persons who
would wantonly interfere with each other’s activity, but also the
state, in particular, sovereigns, who were unaccustomed to ﬁnding
normative limits to their exercise of absolute power.
However strong the argument, protagonists cannot expect it to
ﬁnd support from those who would deny, or remain agnostic, with
respect to the theological premisses. A secular counterpart is evidently needed. Locke himself suggests that one is available when
he insists that reason may be employed to derive the necessity and
content of a system of rights – and this track will be followed later.
For the moment we should recognize that talk of natural rights
carries the transcendental, non-naturalistic, imprint of talk of
natural law. If the whiff of sanctity is unattractive to many, there
is little value in trying to spread it. That is the further reason why
it is best to speak of human rights.
Human rights are a species of moral rights; generally, they
register moral claims and are to be vindicated by moral argument.
As such they have been contrasted with legal rights, which are the
product of some speciﬁc legal system. This contrast in provenance
may conceal a good deal of overlap. The law may recognize moral
rights, embodying in statutes standard liberal rights – to free
speech, freedom of association or religion or whatever. This recognition may take the form of the explicit incorporation of an international charter into a municipal legal system or it may be effected
as speciﬁc proscriptions outlaw e.g. theft or unpermitted use of
personal property. But not all moral rights may be recognized in
particular legal systems. The legal systems may be defective. There
may also be good reason, in particular cases, why moral rights
should not be made legally enforceable. The ancillary costs of
legislation and enforcement, including the augmentation of police
powers, for example, may be too costly to bear. Most often, one who
claims a moral right will demand that this right become a legal
right, enlisting the powers of the state for their protection or the
delivery of some resource, or else requiring the state to constrain
itself in the delivery of other goods if these services would involve
the violation of rights. But this distinction is worth marking, not
least since it sets up for discussion Bentham’s dismissal of talk of
natural rights as nonsense.2 Legal rights, by contrast, are the
creations of legal systems.

136

RIGHTS

The straightforward distinction of legal and moral rights
occludes a further distinction between positive rights and what we
may call critical rights, echoing H.L.A. Hart’s distinction between
positive and critical morality.3 On this account, positive rights will
be rights that are recognized within some appropriate system of
actual, operative, rules. Legal rights are evidently positive rights,
but other systems of rules may recognize rights claims. Thus
religious rights may be positive, as when worshippers have the
right to be married in church or buried in a churchyard. Positive
rights may be assigned within the rules of games. If an opponent
leads out of turn in a game of bridge, declarer has rights to require
one of a range of optional continuations of play. Most confusingly,
one may also speak of moral rights as positive rights in circumstances where a recognized system of moral rules entitles one to
make a legitimate claim. Thus parents may claim a positive moral
right to obedience from their children and children a positive
moral right of independence upon reaching maturity. Where all
parties agree that this is part of the system of domestic regulation
which binds them, that this is how, in fact, morality works here,
positive moral rights are being described. One may, of course,
accept that a parent’s moral right to beat her child is positively
established within a given community without endorsing that
system of positive morality, just as one may identify a legal rule
which one judges to be iniquitous.
By contrast, critical rights are the rights that ought to be recognized, whether, as a matter of fact, they are recognized or not. It
would be odd to claim a critical legal right. Why not state simply
that the law ought to recognize such and such a right where, in
fact, it does not? But there is logical space for such a locution.
There is a special point for insisting on its application in the case
of morality, since a system of positive morality may be criticized in
respect of rights on two fronts: ﬁrst, it may recognize rights which
can ﬁnd no critical endorsement. We can use again the example
mentioned above. Parents may insist, wrongly, the critic protests,
that they have the right to beat their children. The parents may be
correct so far as the positive morality of their community is concerned. Third parties may judge that they do no wrong, perhaps
that they should be praised even for not sparing the lash, not spoiling the child. The critic, on the other hand, judges that there is no

137

RIGHTS

such critical moral right, that the practice of corporal punishment
does not satisfy whatever tests critical reﬂection imposes – and,
obviously, the critic may claim that the exercise of such a positive
moral right violates a right not to be physically assaulted.
Second, critical reﬂection may support the case for rights which
positive morality does not recognize. Where positive morality may
grant parents a veto over the prospective marriage partners of
their children, critics may demand that adult children have the
critical moral right to decide these things for themselves,
independently of parental permission. Of course, just as legal
rights may coincide with moral rights, so may positive moral rights
coincide with the rights demanded by a critical morality. In such
cases, one acknowledges that the positive system of moral rights is
in no need of repair.
One may think that this distinction – of positive and critical
moral rights – is a distinction with a rationale but no purpose.
Later in this chapter, we shall see that much hinges on the question
of whether rights have some distinctive moral force. At that point,
I shall insist that the distinction which I have just drawn is vital
for a clear construal and successful answer to the question.
Hohfeld’s classification
Wesley Hohfeld’s analysis of rights is an exemplary study in jurisprudence. Hohfeld’s prime concern, as the title of his book, Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning,
reminds us, was the understanding of fundamental legal concepts.4
His analysis of rights was focused on legal rights, but it has proved
useful to students of rights more generally. Basically, he claimed
that the notion of a legal right was ambiguous, having four distinct senses. He himself believed the ambiguity was so endemic
and productive of confusion that we should cease to speak of legal
rights altogether. It is fair to say that his disambiguation was so
successful, the lessons of his careful analysis so widely learnt, that
this proposal has proved unnecessary.

138

RIGHTS

Liberty rights or privileges
When we say ‘P has a right to x’, we may mean no more than ‘P has
no duty not to x’. A right of this sort was termed a privilege by
Hohfeld; others have termed it a bare liberty or a liberty right. The
most important feature of such rights is that they are compatible
with others acting in ways that prevent the bearer of rights from
x-ing. The most famous example of a liberty right is that of Thomas
Hobbes’s right of nature, deﬁned as ‘the Liberty each man hath, to
use his own power, as he will himselfe, for the preservation of his
own nature’.5 Hobbes’s point, in insisting that persons may use
even one another’s bodies, is that if one’s life is at stake, all is
permitted. It is rational to use others as a human shield, perhaps,
when the bullets begin to ﬂy. But if, for Hobbes, I do no wrong
when I use your body in this way, you, equally, do no wrong when you
resist (or duck). No one else has a duty to permit you to exercise
the right. Suppose, as Locke believed, one has the right to labour
on land that is unowned and thereby to bring it under ownership.
This right, too, is a liberty right. Everyone has this right. If you
reach the vacant land before I do, and work upon it productively,
the land is yours, notwithstanding my efforts to claim it.
Claim rights
Claim rights are undoubtedly the most important rights in political theory. On this understanding, one who asserts a claim right
to x, claims that some other party has a duty to let him x or a duty
to provide x. Thus ‘P has right to x’ entails that some Q (a speciﬁc
agent, a government or, indeed, everyone) has the duty not to interfere with P’s x-ing or a duty to provide x, where x is some good or
service. Already we have introduced some complexity into the
analysis, and this is worth teasing out.
Rights, we are often told, imply duties. Often, this is the barely
concealed threat of the politician who wishes to instruct people
that if they do not act responsibly and toe the line, rights will be
withdrawn. For others, such a statement may be a gentle reminder
that those who claim the moral stature of bearers of rights also
have the stature of holders of responsibilities. In both cases, the

139

RIGHTS

appearance of logic is doing swift service for what are, at bottom,
substantial theses which require careful argument and considered
application in the circumstances of their employment. It is at least
open to argument that one may have rights but no duties. In
essence, this is how Hobbes characterized the position of the sovereign vis-à-vis the citizens – the sovereign has rights against the
citizens but no duties to them. The citizens have duties to the sovereign, but no rights, other than the residual right of nature,
which they can claim against the sovereign who threatens their
lives. This is as clear a characterization of absolute sovereign
power as any. The thesis, Hobbes’s thesis, that a rational agent
would endorse this asymmetrical pattern of rights and duties, cannot be repudiated by any logical thesis to the effect that rights
entail duties on the part of the rights holder.
In the case of claim rights, a clear logical thesis is available.
Claim rights are, logically, correlative to duties. This correlativity
thesis is what distinguishes claim rights from liberty rights. In the
case where P’s right to x entails a duty on the part of Q not to
interfere with P’s x-ing, we have a right of the classical liberal
form, a right of non-interference. Thus one who claims a right of
free speech claims that the state (and, no doubt, other citizens
severally) have a duty not to prevent her making her opinions
known to other citizens. They may not have a duty to listen, but
they do have a duty not to shut her up. Rights of this sort have been
termed negative rights and rights of action.6
By contrast, claim rights of provision (positive rights, rights of
recipience) engage a different dimension of correlativity. This is
the case where P’s claim right to x imposes a duty of service on
some Q. P’s right that Q fulﬁl a contract is of this sort. Amongst
human rights, such rights as those to education, decent working
conditions and health-care impose a duty of service provision on
the appropriate governmental (or international) agencies.
The correlativity of rights and duties in the case of claim rights
should not be taken as a thesis asserting the analyticity of the
corresponding claims concerning rights and duties. In insisting
that P’s claim right to x imposes a duty on some Q, we suggest (and
most certainly do not preclude) a justicationary thesis to the effect
that Q’s duty may be derived from P’s right, that P’s right is
the ground of Q’s duty.7 Exactly how the derivation may be

140

RIGHTS

accomplished may be a complex issue. P’s right may give rise to a
range of duties distributed amongst different agencies.8 My right
to life imposes a duty on other persons not to kill me and perhaps a
duty of care whenever others (in a manner not too costly to themselves) can prevent third parties killing me or, in Good Samaritan
cases, give me necessary ﬁrst-aid. This right may also impose a
duty on the state to protect me against killers.
This cluster of distinctions (rights of non-interference vs rights
of provision, rights of action vs rights of recipience, negative
rights vs positive rights) has been the source of continued argument concerning human rights, not least since it has been related
to the distinction of classical liberal rights from the social and
economic rights promulgated in the 1948 UN Charter, and I shall
return to it later. For the moment let us continue the task of
charting the terminology appropriate for claim rights.
The next distinction to be uncovered is a point of jurisprudence,
as signalled by the Latin vocabulary – the distinction between
rights in personam and rights in rem. Rights in personam entail
correlative duties on the part of assigned individuals. The classical example is that of the right of the creditor to the debtor’s
service. If you promised to pay me £100, I have the right, in personam, to claim the £100 from you. Rights in rem are rights claimable against anyone or any institution. My right to wander through
the streets of Glasgow is a right I can claim against anyone who
tells me to clear off, individuals or ofﬁcials, a right against the
world. Where human rights are concerned, rights of noninterference are generally rights in rem – rights claimable against
anyone who may contemplate interference. Human rights in personam are hard to ﬁnd, but there may be examples. The rights of
children against their parents, to fostering care, may be an
example. Certainly the duties of parents are not the same as the
duties of citizens, although tax-payers may have a duty to foot bills
for the costs of child-care where parents prove incapable of fulﬁlling their duties.
A last distinction has been usefully explored in recent years by
Jeremy Waldron – that between special rights and general rights.9
Special rights arise out of some contingent deed or transaction;
the standard example, again, would be the rights arising out of a
promise or contract. It is (just) imaginable that there could be a

141

RIGHTS

world without promises. In which case, in this peculiar world,
there would be no promisee’s rights. If victims have a right to
compensation from those who violate their rights, this right, too,
would be a special right. It is contingent on the occasion of negligence or crime. General rights, by contrast, are not the product
of contingencies. A person’s right to life, violated by his murder,
holds independently of anything that he may have done or suffered. It follows that general rights are universal. A right is general
which ‘all men have if they are capable of choice: they have it qua
men and not only if they are members of some society or stand in
some special relation to each other’.10 An equally useful way of
drawing this distinction is to equate special rights with conditional rights and general rights with unconditional rights. In
fact, this second way of putting things strikes me as superior. It
allows us to say that everyone has the right that promises to them
be kept, subject to the condition that a promise has been made.
Everyone has the right to compensation, subject to the condition
that they have been injured.
These distinctions offer us a useful apparatus for characterizing
philosophical disputes. But they are not sledgehammers designed
to effect knock-down arguments, capable of silencing opponents by
their sure-handed employment. Take the distinction of rights of
non-interference and rights of provision. Some have insisted that
genuine human rights are general rights holding in rem. This is
unproblematic if one is characterizing the traditional liberal freedoms – the rights to life, free speech, association etc. . . . All persons may have them, claiming them against all others who may
interfere. It is held, by contrast, that rights of provision, positive
rights, in particular the social and economic rights recognized by
the United Nations Charter, immediately give rise to problems.
With rights of non-interference, everyone has a correlative duty
not to interfere. With rights of provision, someone must have a
duty to make available the goods and services claimed of right. But
who, exactly?11
The wrong way to settle this issue is to insist that since genuine
human rights are rights in rem, held against everyone, and since it
is impossible to hold everyone responsible for the provision of the
necessary goods, in the same way that everyone has a responsibility not to kill others, rights to the provision of goods and services,

142

RIGHTS

such as the economic and social rights, cannot be genuine human
rights at all. A proponent of economic and social rights may simply challenge the premiss that genuine economic rights are rights
in rem. Clearly a lot of work has to be done in specifying exactly
who or which agency has the duty to provide the goods demanded.
In the case of the right to education, for example, duties may be
assigned to parents, to tax-payers, to schoolteachers, to local
authorities and the state, or to international, intergovernmental
agencies. Everything depends on what the right to education is
thought to entail in the particular circumstances.
It may look as though the lack of speciﬁcity here, in respect of
the agent or agency against which the right is claimed, itself marks
a striking contrast between rights of non-interference and rights
of provision. But this would be a mistake. Take a standard negative
right, what looks at ﬁrst sight to be incontrovertibly a right of noninterference – the right to life, in pristine colours, construed as the
right not to be killed, a right claimed against all others. In any
realistic circumstances, one who claims such a right will not be
satisﬁed with proscriptions that make it clear that one who violates such a right does wrong. She will require protections more
solid than this. She will require, of her government, that such acts
are declared illegal. Further, she will require that the institutions
of government (in this case, primarily the police), take whatever
actions are necessarary to protect her from potential violations.
Against explicit threats to herself or to those of her sex, race,
ethnic or religious community, special protection may be required.
Against a background of general risk, she may demand that the
agencies of the state undertake whatever preventive measures may
best protect her and all others. Whatever the social background or
perceived incidence of danger, citizens may demand institutions to
back up the legal proscriptions designed to protect rights. They
will insist upon courts of law to judge guilt and penal institutions
to inﬂict whatever punishments the courts deem appropriate. Just
as soon as one begins to specify the form of institution required to
achieve protection, to guarantee as far as possible the moral space
required to pursue whatever activities one claims to be legitimate
as of right, one is committed to the provision of resources to
ﬁnance the protective activities. Characteristically, rights of noninterference are claimable both in rem, against all and sundry who

143

RIGHTS

would agress against the individual, and in personam, where speciﬁc individuals or agencies have duties of protection, prevention
or care. We saw above the range of persons and agencies who may
be assigned the duty of providing education for the young.
Much the same list of agencies may be enlisted as guardians of the
security of young people.
A similar reply can be made to those who urge that it is a condition of the existence of human rights that it be practically possible
to fulﬁl the duties to respect them. This is easy, it is claimed for
rights of non-interference. These call on agents not to interfere,
not to stop others wandering the streets, using their private property, worshipping their gods. There is an inﬁnite number of actions
I can be called upon not to do. Logically, I can comply with an
inﬁnite number of such claims against me. This is not so with
respect to duties of provision, since these require resources for
their fulﬁlment – and the resources at anyone’s disposal may be
limited. This is as true of states as it is of individuals.
This is a striking difference between rights of non-interference
and rights of provision. Controversy arises just as soon as this
distinction is deemed to coincide exactly with that between the
classical liberal rights and social and economic rights, and the
social and economic rights are downgraded, judged improper
because they are impracticable. As we have seen, rights of noninterference can be very onerous in respect of the costs placed on
agencies deemed apt for their protection. As soon as the prevention of crime is judged a proper strategy for those charged with the
protection of citizen’s rights – and this looks sensible to me –
where does crime prevention stop? Many have pointed out that,
since the Devil ﬁnds work for idle hands, a strategy of full
employment is a constructive way for a society to protect the negative rights of its members. We know that most violent crime is
inﬂicted by the desperately poor upon those as poor as themselves.
Some believe that more generous welfare provision will reduce the
incidence of this sort of rights violation. They may well be right.
This is a straightforwardly empirical matter. But again, if as a
matter of fact, they are right, the resources required for the effective protection of citizens against assault and robbery may need to
be massive.
The most reasonable conclusion to draw is not that it is improper

144

RIGHTS

to ascribe rights in circumstances where provision or protection is
costly, but that such protection and provision should be effected in
a systematic, institutional fashion, and the costs of systematic
provision should be widely borne. Of course, I should not be
responsible for the entire costs of your child’s health-care, but
then I alone should not be responsible for the costs of protecting
your child (and every other child) from assault. All rights, negative
or positive, liberal or socio-economic, require institutional support
and the costs of such support should be distributed amongst members of the community which is responsible for making provision.
Assigning responsibility, and issuing the appropriate tax bills,
may be a controversial political exercise but the difﬁculty of the
task should not lead us to devalue the rights which require us to
engage it.
The analytic apparatus I have been introducing promises simplicity and clarity in the way we think about claim rights. It does
not promise simplicity and clarity in respect of working out what
thinly described rights (e.g. the right to physical security) demand
of whom in what circumstances or of devising policy proposals for
giving them effect.
Powers
The third element of Hohfeld’s analysis of legal rights concerns
rights as powers. The classic example of such a power is the
right to bequeath property. The species of power in question is
the power to alter assignments of rights and duties. This may
seem a peripheral sense of legal right and its application in the
ﬁeld of human rights may seem even more limited. There are
striking examples, though, of human rights or elements of
human rights which look very much like powers as Hohfeld
describes them.
One element of the right to private property is the right to
acquire or take into possession goods that are unowned. There is a
very great puzzle here that much exercised John Locke. Think of
unowned goods as common stock, unowned land as a common
resource. Suppose everyone has a liberty right to use what they
can get hold of or work upon. On what grounds may anyone be able

145

RIGHTS

to take goods or land from this common stock, claim it legitimately
as his or her private possession and disbar all others from the use
of it? This is not a problem we shall take up here – but notice the
form of the right claimed by the ﬁrst occupant or labourer who
takes the good into private property. It is presumably the right to
alter the rights and duties of all others who may hitherto have had
the opportunity to use the resource. If the argument works as follows: Through my useful labour on this unowned land, I acquire
the right to exclude all others from its use, I am claiming a right in
the sense of a power to alter the rights of others. Hitherto, they
had a liberty right of acquisition or occasional use, maybe. Now
they have no such right. Indeed my act of appropriation has
created for them the duty not to use the land or travel across it
without permission.
Another right which looks very like a Hohfeldian power is the
democratic right of political participation, construed as the right
to take part in political decision-making by casting a vote, either
directly for a policy option as in a referendum, or indirectly, for a
representative who will have further decision-making powers. It is
not easy to see this as a claim right, analysable as negative or
positive, a right of non-interference or provision (though voting
mechanisms need to be organized and made available as a common
service and interference with the citizen’s access to this service
needs to be prohibited).12 Perhaps it is best seen as a Hohfeldian
power, to institute or alter, along with other voters, the legal rights
and duties of fellow citizens.
Immunities
Hohfeld’s ﬁnal category of rights, immunities, is perhaps the least
important or least noticed. An immunity, technically, is the
obverse of a power. P has an immunity with respect to x if no Q has
the right, in the sense of a power, to alter P’s legal standing with
respect to x. An immunity is frequently an important element of
rights more loosely construed. As Waldron points out, rights
which are entrenched as the subject of constitutional guarantees,
protected by a Bill of Rights, say, involve an element of immunity:
‘not only do I have no duty not to do x or not only do others have a

146

RIGHTS

duty to let me do x but also no one – not even the legislature – has a
power to alter that situation.’13
A different example is found in the idea of ‘due process’. Law
courts, evidently, have powers to alter the rights of those found
guilty. Many of the rights which come under the heading of rights
to a fair trial in accordance with the due processes of law, can be
best understood as immunities, as protections against arbitrariness or excess in the use of those powers. Thus one aspect of the
right of silence is best understood as an immunity against the
power of juries to draw the inference of guilt or self-serving
concealment against defendants who refuse to testify at their trial.
Generic rights and specific rights
Hohfeld’s analysis was a virtuoso enterprise. Its success, in forcing
us to think through the logical implications of rights claims,
throws up a further problem. Declarations and charters, as well as
common usage, list rights in very general terms: life, property, worship, association, health-care, education, to list a few. We know
that matters are much more complicated than this. We know that
the central terms, ‘life’, ‘property’, etc. are serving almost as slogans for a complex constellation of Hohfeldian privileges, claims,
powers and immunities, in any concrete employment. If we ask, in
respect of the positive assignment of rights in any speciﬁc legal
system, what, say, the right of private property amounts to, we may
be given volumes of legal textbooks, detailing case and statute law
– all with the proviso that things will have changed since publication: check the latest Law Reports. This is the state of affairs with
respect to positive law. Add to it the complexities of unenforceable
positive morality concerning private property. This would
lengthen the library shelves were it to be codiﬁed – which, of
course, it could not be. When should we say ‘Please . . .’ and ‘Thank
you’ and when not?
As philosophers, it looks as though we are faced with two alternatives: Is there in some sense a generic right to be defended or
opposed – in this case the right to private property – or do we need
to justify, severally, each of a number of speciﬁc rights (which may
have the character of liberty rights, claim rights, powers or

147

RIGHTS

immunities) which somehow together amount to the right in question, the right of ownership?
Clearly arguments at both levels may be engaged. Waldron, for
example distinguishes ideals of collective, common and private
property14 and argues that, at this level of abstraction, the different property systems may be compared under an evaluative
schema. This is plausible, or at least recognizable: one philosopher
may point to the advantages in point of utility of a system of private property; another may defend a system of common property as
necessary for the promotion of freedom. They both agree that it is
the property system, thus abstractly conceived, that calls for
defence.
But the opposite view is equally plausible. One may believe that
the system of private (or common) property can only be justiﬁed
piecemeal, in a bottom-up fashion. Suppose one believes that the
right to private property is a congeries of discrete rules concerning possession, exclusive use, management, receipt of income, capital value, security and transmission, etc. . . .15 One may require
that each of these be vindicated separately. One may endorse
rights of bequest – but these may conﬂict with rights of inheritance. One may insist upon rights of income from property and
dispute that these give rise to the liability of payment of tax. What
looks to be the core right – exclusive use of what one owns – may be
limited or rejected on occasion of national emergency, or because
a local authority requires the land for a bypass route or the construction of necessary housing. Individual rights may have to coexist with incompatible national or local rights according to some
established system of adjudication. A tidy solution would ﬁnd a
line of justiﬁcation for the generic right which could be employed
to examine the credentials of the separate elements of that right
as these are examined. An untidy solution would ﬁnd one argumentative strategy being employed in defence of the generic right
and then different approaches being adopted for whatever speciﬁc
rights are deemed to comprise it. Thus one may ﬁnd oneself justifying the generic right to private property as necessary for freedom
and yet recognizing that rights of inheritance (as against, perhaps,
rights of bequest) cannot be justiﬁed in this way. Maybe utilitarian
arguments are the only ones which can ﬁnd a purchase here.

148

RIGHTS

Individual and group rights
There can be no doubt that the traditional rhetoric of natural and
human rights focused directly on the rights of individual human
agents. Rights are held by individuals against each other and
against supra-individual agencies, most particularly the state.
Although Hegel claimed that notions of individual rights originate in the concepts of Roman Law, and Richard Tuck, a modern
historian, traces their origins to the early Middle Ages,16 the
notion of equal, universal rights ﬁrst blossomed in the seventeenth
century: for some a product of the individualism explicit in Protestant theology (each person having her own access to God and
His revelation in sacred writings, unmediated by priests and
saints), for others the ideology apt to emergent capitalism, for still
others, a political response to the development of the nation-state
– and all of these stories have some claim to truth.
Central to all these accounts is the idea of the person as the
proper subject of rights, where person denotes the minimal moral
status to which modern individuals do (or should) aspire. Person
thus becomes a technical term of moral metaphysics, designating
the individual human being as the maker of moral claims, the
bearer of fundamental rights. To see oneself as a person is to make
claims of right and, an important corollary for most rights theorists, to recognize the equivalent claims of others. Hegel characterizes this conception of morality in his commandment of right: ‘be a
person and respect others as persons.’17 For Hegel (not frequently,
and for good reason, thought to be one of the classical advocates of
human rights), it is a distinctive feature of the modern world that
individuals see themselves as discrete and different, atomistic loci
of personal moral claims of right, a status asserted against others
and recognized when asserted by others. You may well ask: What is
the default position? How could persons not identify themselves in
this elementary and obvious fashion? Hegel’s answer is that this
reﬂective perspective on the moral self is an historical achievement. Time was, man’s ﬁrst response to the question: What or who
am I? put as an enquiry into one’s moral identity, would be
answered by spelling out one’s membership of a family, tribe or
wider community – an ancient Greek polis, perhaps.
We don’t need to concern ourselves with this historical debate.

149

RIGHTS

It may be that Hegel is wrong to view the claims of personality as
historically emergent and parochial. Maybe individual human
beings always, as a matter of fact, saw themselves as discrete
human atoms. Hegel himself emphasizes that this is at best a partial and incomplete conception of the moral self. Nonetheless, as a
description of the associated metaphysics of the human rights
tradition, this account of the person is spot on. It enables us to see
very clearly the foundation of rights claims in a social ontology
which emphasizes the moral potency of discrete individuals, since
rights claims serve to establish the moral boundaries of distinct
persons. Moral rights serve as ‘hyper-planes in moral space’ for
Robert Nozick,18 partitioning the moral universe into a collection
of individual rights bearers. The language of rights, paradigmatically, expresses the distinctive moral vocabulary of the
metaphysical perspective of discrete persons. Both Hegel, in his
discussion of ‘abstract rights’ (‘abstract’ because all that persons
have to say for themselves qua persons is that they are essentially
different from each other – there are no ends or goods distinctive
of the sense each has of himself as a person) and Nozick, in modern times, in his discussion of rights as side-constraints (of which,
more later) capture the heart of rights talk.
But to say that they capture the heart of rights talk is not to
endorse that talk or the metaphysical doctrines it encapsulates,
nor is it to claim that this individualistic perspective gives us the
whole story about rights. It clearly does not. It explains the force,
and for some, the priority of negative rights. It explains the sense
in which rights violations are seen as boundary-crossings, but not
the sense in which they may be failures of provision. But this is
water under the bridge. Our central issue here concerns the typical
subjects or bearers of rights, and, according to the account just
sketched, these will be individual human beings. There is an
intimate connection between a metaphysics of social singularity,
social atomism, if you like, and claims of right which demarcate
the boundaries of that singularity.
This has been noticed by critics of human rights as well as their
advocates. Within the socialist tradition in particular, there has
been a marked hostility to human rights talk predicated on this
implicit individualism. With respect to Marx himself, this hostility
principally derived from the thought that this metaphysics of the

150

RIGHTS

person cut no deeper than economic man, the isolated consumer,
producer or party to economic contracts, more particularly, the
bourgeois capitalist entrepreneur. So the rights of man are in
truth the rights of capital; the morality of rights is the appropriate
ideology of capitalist production.19 But Marx’s point is wider than
this and has been taken up by many who would repudiate the
typically Marxist critique. The more general claim is that the
metaphysics of the person, which stands as the foundation of doctrines of human rights, is fundamentally mistaken. This charge
comes in a variety of forms. At its most radical it is the thesis that
the person, as thus technically construed, is a ﬁction. There is no
such thing as the isolated, atomic, bounded and discrete human
agent. We are all of us, through birth and history, members of
various communities – families, tribes, nations: whatever living
associations frame our identities. This is the central theme of
modern communitarianism.20
It is obviously true, if we think of the person-as-bearer-of-rights
as a solitary individual, a Robinson Crusoe, or as a person bereft
of all affective ties to other human beings, recognizing no allegiances or claims of membership, that there are few or none such.
The ‘unencumbered self’ is a ﬁction.21 But to speak of the person as
discrete and bounded should not be taken to express the whole
truth concerning the social ontology of individual human beings
or their derivative moral or political standing.
The metaphysical debates of liberals and communitarians concerning the proper ontological locus of rights and duties cannot
be reviewed here. So let me state my own view without argument
and with an invitation to readers to pursue matters further: of
course we are, severally, discrete human beings. The further
thought that we are persons confers moral potency to this, now
almost universal, perspective amongst self-conscious agents. As
individuals we have interests so strong that they require us to
impose duties on others. The right to life, taken as an assertion
against others that they shall not murder us, is a clear example of
this way of thinking. So is the right to health-care, where this is
not claimed on the basis of e.g. one’s role as family breadwinner,
but on the basis of one’s own interest in continued living. The
right to freedom of occupation, taken as a denial that others may
allocate to us tasks which match their conception of our abilities,

151

RIGHTS

is another. The nearest we get to an argument here is the thought
that such claims as these would be unintelligible were we not to
identify them as the demands of individual human beings. But this
is not to insist that all human rights claims have this character.
The obvious counterexamples are the political rights: standardly
the right to vote, but otherwise the various rights which are
required by the ideal of participation in the political life of the
community – rights to the free expression of opinions, of free
access to information, to the free association of like-minded individuals to review, and if necessary amend, their political commitments and to publically agitate on behalf of these – to hold public
meetings or otherwise demonstrate their policy proposals. None of
these rights make sense as the precondition of individual projects.
Each of them presupposes a basic recognition of citizenship: the
thought that, alongside others, one has an active part to play in the
political life of the community. Political rights, for the most part,
make sense against a background of communal participation in
the decision-making processes of the community. The citizen takes
part qua citizen, in a manner that would be unintelligible if allegiance to the decision-making powers of the community were not
understood. It is as citizen, not as person, that one claims political
rights.
This idea – that individuals ﬁrst cite their association with
others, then demand as rights whatever this effective association
demands, has application over a wide range of characteristically
human activities. Not only do we think of individuals having
rights as members of groups, we think of groups of people having
rights themselves. Talk of families having rights, or clubs, or
churches, or ﬁrms, or still wider communities being rights bearers,
is not metaphorical, nor does it reduce to a concatenation of individuals’ rights. The relation between the rights of a community
and the rights of individual members may be complex and distinctive. A crofting township has exclusive rights of land use. Only
members may graze cattle on the common land. Individual crofters
have inclusive rights; each may graze up to ﬁve cattle, let us say,
without infringing the grazing rights of other crofters.22 Often the
articles of association of groups will make provision for individual
rights to be assigned upon dissolution of the group. Club members
may have individual rights to a share of receipts, should jointly

152

RIGHTS

held property be sold, for example. Individual members of families
will be assigned rights to a portion of the family assets should the
family dissolve in divorce. It would be a mistake to deduce that the
assignment of rights which follows dissolution reveals the basic
pattern of rights holding when the association is operative. A
structure of inclusive rights is not shown to be exclusive after all
simply because exclusive rights are granted when the association
is wound up. Following divorce I may expect to claim half the value
of family assets. It does not follow from this that I, presently
married, own exclusively half the family car.
Group rights are tricky to analyse because groups have radically
different normative structures. Still, one interesting thought may
be hazarded – that the assertion of group rights always attests the
existence of the group as a unit of moral agency, having something
of the boundedness and singularity claimed for individual persons.
One way of making sense of the notion of an artiﬁcial or corporate
person is to mark the distinctiveness of the hypothesized group in
terms of the legitimacy of rights claims. Families have rights that
may be asserted against other families or other institutions. As a
parent, I recalled being mildly worried by my children’s reports
that they had been invited by their class teacher to recite some
‘news’. Principle (I insist!), rather than bad conscience or potential
embarrassment, caused me to worry that family privacy rights may
well be invaded by this practice. Nations, likewise, advertise themselves as units of moral agency when they claim rights of territorial sovereignty against invaders. It would be a mistake to think
that politicians who denounce territorial aggression are speaking
up as the agents of those individuals whose private holdings are
under threat. Does it make sense to speak of the rights of the
human race? I can think of no actual cases where it does. Could it
possibly make sense? Only, I think, in circumstances where it is
recognizable that the interests of the species as a group need to be
asserted against outsiders – Martians, say, to use an image from
outdated science ﬁction. It is not suprising that when such talk is
used to legitimate the eating of meat or animal experimentation
that critics denounce it as ‘speciesism’, since that is exactly the
presupposition: the human species is a distinct grouping with
proper interests to defend and promote against the competing
claims of other groups.

153

RIGHTS

Mention of group rights gives rise to a special difﬁculty which
should be noted before we move on. I have not so far explained how
group rights (or, indeed, any rights) may be defended, having
sought to explain only how they may be understood. Recent literature on group rights, motivated in part by efforts to come to philosophical terms with the practical problems of multicultural coexistence, has revealed a distinctive form of conﬂict between
rights claims.23 This is the conﬂict between rights claimed by some
speciﬁc group, generally to live lives in accordance with their distinctive religious beliefs, and rights which members of that group
may claim as individuals against that group. The conﬂict is especially hard where the individual rights equate to or are derived
from universal rights such as freedom of conscience. One example
that Kymlicka discusses concerns the right of Amish parents to
withdraw their children from school before the age of 16, thus isolating them from the attractions of the outside world and better
securing their allegiance to the traditions of their community.
This practice severely reduces the opportunities for Amish children to determine for themselves whether they wish to continue to
subscribe to the faith and lifestyle of their community, since it
reduces their ability to canvass alternatives. It poses, for the liberal, the general question of whether individual rights should be
assigned priority over group rights, and readers may ﬁnd many
other, less starkly described, cases which raise similar issues.
When freedom of worship licenses freedom to indoctrinate the
young, freedom of the individual conscience may be effectively
compromised. Conﬂicts of individual rights are endemic. Suppose
they can be resolved piecemeal by investigating the relative stringencies of the rights in conﬂict or the relative importance of the
interests that the right claims protect or promote. So long as we
accept that group rights may not be decomposed into a set of individual rights (and the existence of conﬂicts of the sort decribed
may itself count as a reason for supposing that they may not), the
question at issue may be put as the question of whether group
rights are systematically less stringent than individual rights. In
advance of broaching more general questions concerning the justiﬁcation of rights claims, I can think of no reason why they might
be – which suggests that we turn immediately to the hard problem
of justiﬁcation.

154

RIGHTS

The justification of rights
Having distinguished, in Hohfeldian manner, the variety of rights
and having broached other questions concerning the analysis of
rights claims, we can move forward to discuss how rights claims
are to be justiﬁed. We can make a useful beginning by looking at
the classical doctrines of John Locke.
Lockean themes: modes of ownership
As we saw brieﬂy above, Locke offers a most straightforward argument for natural rights. Mankind, he tells us, is God’s creation. He
made us and He owns us. Our appointed task is to serve His purposes and our life of service requires that we all ﬁnd equal protection in our independent pursuit of His design for us. Since we
cannot act as trustees of His purposes unless our lives, health,
liberty and possessions are respected, we have a natural right to
these goods, subject to our respecting equivalent claims that other
trustees of his purposes make upon us. A natural right is a right
asserted in accordance with natural law, that is God’s law, prescribed to us as His creation.24 Hence we can claim against others
that (negatively) they do not interfere with our life in God’s service
and (positively) as parents or, in extremis, fellow creatures, that
they provide us with the wherewithal of properly human life.
This is a lovely argument. Grant the premisses and the conclusion swiftly follows: each may claim and all must respect the rights
deemed necessary for the achievement of values everyone should
endorse. What is more, this line of argument is fertile; it enables us
to work through in detail and state limits on the generic rights
Locke describes. It enables us to ﬂesh out the right to property and
to detail the political rights appropriate to the right of equal liberty. These turn out to include rights of punishment and rebellion,
in case these further rights are necessary for the protection of
individual rights. Sadly, the argument has no more strength than
its premisses bestow, and however much one approves of Locke’s
conclusions (or looks forward to developing the argument
further in directions Locke never dreamed of) one cannot expect
all of those to whom claims of right are directed to accept the

155

RIGHTS

theological foundations. Well and good if these premisses ﬁnd
acceptance. But if they don’t, and one can expect that for many
they won’t, other arguments will need to be advanced.
Locke himself believed that the natural law which vindicated
natural rights was discernible by reason. It is a matter of scholarly
debate how far reason, as Locke construes it, can operate
independently of one’s acceptance of religious doctrine. If reason
is a matter of exploring the implications of truths revealed in
scripture, evidently it is not a guide to natural law or morality
which non-believers can be expected to trust.
We can put this dispute concerning the interpretation of Locke’s
doctrines to one side, since some have found in his writings premisses they believe all can accept, premisses which might serve to
ground human rights. When, in Chapter V of the Second Treatise,
Locke tackles the hard problem of the right to private property, he
insists that ‘every Man has a Property in his own Person. This no
Body has any Right to but himself. The Labour of his Body and the
Work of his Hands, we may say, are properly his.’25 Call this
doctrine the Thesis of Self-Ownership.
The self-ownership thesis has powerful friends and creates
strange allies. It vindicates Robert Nozick’s claim that the taxation of income for redistributive purposes is ‘forced labour’,26 and
it serves to ground the charge of exploitation of labour under capitalism pressed by G.A. Cohen.27 The thought that we naturally
own ourselves is of the ﬁrst importance in understanding historical debates concerning the legitimacy of slavery and the frequently associated thesis that legitimate hierarchical social and
political relations must have consensual foundations. Some argued
that, owning ourselves, we may sell ourselves or otherwise consent
to slavery or political subjection. Others claimed that the property
we have in ourselves is inalienable – slavery and subjection
are thereby unjustiﬁable. Others argue that, since the self cannot
be alienated in the fashion of private property, the self cannot
intelligibly be owned – by others or by ourselves.
It is clear that there are vital issues canvassed in these disputes
– but I shan’t engage them in any depth. I see the vindication of
human rights in terms of self-ownership as a kind of philosophical
shadow-boxing whereby metaphor, allusion and analogy take
the place of argument. Let me explain. Rights of ownership are

156

RIGHTS

generally exclusionary (but not always so – the possibility of inclusive rights of ownership should be kept in mind by the sceptic). A
standard element of the generic right to private property is the
right to exclusive occupation and use. What one owns one may
employ for one’s private use. Already we have a picture of the
owner acting within a space of private possession, which space is
determined and bounded by speciﬁc rights to assignable property.
The picture can be elaborated; if the possession is land, the
boundaries of my rights are drawn at my fences. You may not cross
without my permission otherwise you violate my rights.
The thesis of self-ownership states that persons stand in a relationship of ownership to themselves. Since we take them to own
themselves, there are things which others may not do to them
without violating their rights as self-owners. We can trace out a
rough symmetry between the rights of self-owners and the rights
of owners proper. Just as you have a duty not to destroy, damage,
use or invade my property, so you have duties not to kill, injure,
enslave or otherwise aggress against me. A thesis of selfownership is perfectly acceptable if it collects together agreed
rights and then operates as a sort of shorthand for them. To say
that rape offends a principle of self-ownership will go proxy for an
argument to the effect that persons have a right to physical integrity (along with other rights in the self-ownership list) and that
rape is a violation of this right, i.e. one right amongst the collection. On this account, one might distinguish rights of selfownership from rights of collective pursuit, rights to engage in
activities alongside others, taking this latter category to include
political rights and rights of non-political association. No one
can object to a vocabulary which usefully synthesizes a range of
operational concepts.
If we think of rights of self-ownership in this way, believing the
concept ﬁnds useful philosophical employment, who can gainsay
it? Unfortunately, though, it may be paraded as a justiﬁcatory
claim – that persons have such and such rights in virtue of being
owners of themselves, that claims of right may be derived from a
person’s status as self-owner. This is clearly Locke’s strategy in the
argument cited above. Suppose one were to make such a claim.
Straight away one would face the demand that the right of selfownership itself be justiﬁed. I don’t want to insist that this is

157

RIGHTS

impossible, illogical or inconsistent since I don’t know how this
might be shown. I do insist, however, that this effort would be misdirected. Murder, rape, assault, theft, damage and trespass: each
of these should be determined as wrong quite independently of
any theory of self-ownership. Rights to life, bodily integrity,
and property do not need us to defend an antecedent right
of self-ownership.
An open-minded, reﬂective individual of the sort that is
attracted to philosophical speculation may well be stumped by the
question: Why is it wrong to murder or rape or steal? I think it is
unlikely that anyone such could ﬁnd an answer that is both convincing and recognizably deeper than the intuitions which prompt
their recognition of the moral seriousness of questions such as
these. This is blunt assertion. I may be wrong. No doubt questions
will multiply. Of one thing I am sure: no one should advance the
concept of self-ownership as somehow foundational. And this not
because novel doctrines can’t turn out to be true or illuminating.
Rather, doctrines of ownership are too familiar. They carry the
baggage of ancient debates concerning property rights – and such
doctrines as these have been put in question. It is a counsel of
despair to urge that one ﬁrst settle philosophical questions concerning ownership and then move on to derive a full account of
human rights from the conclusions reached.
As suggested above, the idea of self-ownership has shown itself
to be particularly attractive to liberals in the context of debates
about slavery. For if the self-ownership theory is recognized as a
self-evident truth, it challenges straight off the claim that one person may be the property of another, that is, a slave. But this challenge may be met. Some might disagree with the claim that the
right to liberty is inalienable, imagining circumstances in which
one might literally trade risky or impecunious freedom for wellfattened slavery. If the alternative is death (certainly) or great
shame (perhaps), slavery might look an attractive option. These
questions are deep and ancient (and modern) philosophers have
explored them.28 At the heart of these discussions is the attempt to
characterize a minimal moral status attributable to all (or just
about all) human beings – the moral status, as mentioned above, of
the person. I claim that the thesis of self-ownership cannot
explicate this status. At best, it can summarize the results of

158

RIGHTS

such a conceptual exploration. Is there a better alternative to the
Lockean theme of self-ownership? Many will ﬁnd this in the
concept of autonomy.
Autonomy again
We encountered the concept of autonomy when discussing the
value of freedom. For many philosophers, discussions of freedom
and rights cover the same conceptual terrain. It seems to matter
little whether we think of private property, for example, as the
object of a human right or as one of the classical freedoms. It
would be hard to disentangle discussions of the right to practice
one’s religion from discussions of freedom of worship. Rights may
be described in terms of freedom – the right to free speech is an
obvious example. The relation may be even deeper than that
evinced by coincidence or connectedness of usage: in a famous
paper, H.L.A. Hart argued for the thesis that, ‘if there are any
moral rights at all, it follows that there is at least one natural
right, the equal right of all men to be free’.29 Those who advocate
negative claim rights, rights to non-interference, evidently value
freedom of action within the space created by the proscription.
Positive claim rights, demanding the provision of some good or
service, may articulate the requirements of positive freedom. Generally, those who value freedom may express their claims in terms
of rights, insisting as a matter of human rights that the valued
opportunities be provided or protected. This suggests, albeit at the
cost of some strain in ordinary usage, that the languages of rights
and freedom are intertranslatable, that liberal values may be
expressed as rights or freedoms, that the liberal is given a choice of
moral idiom.
Furthermore, one may believe that this conceptual luxury has
analytic foundations in the concept of autonomy. We have already
noticed how, for some, the value of freedom is founded in the ideal
of autonomy and we have given this thesis qualiﬁed endorsement.
Suppose that one is operating with a simpliﬁed model of autonomy
characterized as reﬂective choice.30 We can now tie the analysis of
both rights and freedom to autonomy. An agent’s freedom is his
capacity to select a way of life that suits him and act in accordance

159

RIGHTS

with this choice. In similar fashion, one has a right in case he is
empowered to make a protected choice.
The relation between freedom and rights is a philosophical
mineﬁeld and the relation of each to grounding considerations of
autonomy cautions us to step very carefully. If one employs a simple (negative) conception of personal freedom and restricts rights
to negative rights of individual action, one can see straight away
that the appropriate sphere of freedom is demarcated by the
ascription of rights which impose duties of non-interference on
governments and other agencies. At its most basic, the value of
autonomy grounds rights claims which impose duties which
thereby protect freedom. Freedom is violated when agents transgress the duties required of them in virtue of the legitimate rights
of autonomous agents. Would that philosophy were so simple!
We have already seen the value of freedom is too complex to
permit such swift analysis. We should not be surprised if the same
conclusion is forced by our investigation of rights.
Let us advance the thesis that human rights are justiﬁed on the
grounds that they promote autonomy. One bad argument for this
thesis is that it follows directly from a central feature of rights –
that rights bearers are essentially in a position of choice with
respect to the fulﬁlment of the duties imposed by the rights they
claim. To have a right is to have a choice – which is to express the
agent’s autonomy. Thus if I have an exclusive right of access to my
property, it’s up to me whether I grant you permission to walk
around it. The element of choice that ﬁgures in all rights claims
consists in the rights bearer’s power of waiving the duties which
his possession of the right imposes.31
The central claim of this thesis may be disputed. Some rights
may be inalienable, their bearers may not be able to waive them.
The right to be free has been thought by some to have this status,
as mentioned above; one cannot legitimately give oneself up to
slavery. The right to life has been thought inalienable, to the point
where suicide is proscribed. The alienability of these rights is controversial, but the issues cannot be settled by conceptual ﬁat, by an
insistence that no right can be inalienable since rights holders
always, by deﬁnition, have a power of waiver. A different kind of
case, but one making a similar point, concerns those who have the
right to vote in jurisdictions where submitting a ballot paper is

160

RIGHTS

compulsory. They may or may not have the freedom to vote – analysts differ on this issue – but voters who do what the law requires
of them are acting in accordance with a valuable right. Some may
think the right would be more valuable were citizens to be offered
the associated right to abstain, but that it is less valuable (if indeed
it is less valuable) should not lead us to discount it as a right.
There is a different strand of argument connecting autonomy
and rights. The sense of ‘autonomy’ which is employed is an
informal development of the skeletal Kantian account given in
terms of a capacity to formulate universally applicable moral laws
and act in accordance with them or the right not to be treated as a
means, merely. As a recent theorist puts it:
Recognizing autonomy as a right requires us to respect the dignity of the person: to treat others not as playthings or objects or
resources that we may use for our own purposes but as individuals who are capable, at least potentially, of forming plans,
entering into relationships, pursuing projects, and living in
accordance with an ideal of a worthwhile life.32
Dagger describes autonomy as the capacity to lead a selfgoverned life. ‘Every other right either derives from it or is in some
sense a manifestation of our human right to autonomy.’33 This
echoes associated themes familiar in the work of other celebrated
modern liberals: rights reﬂect the fact of our separate existences,
the fact that there are distinct individuals, each with his own life to
lead (Nozick); they require us to take seriously the distinction
between persons (Rawls); persons equally have a right of moral
independence (Dworkin). Such rhetoric is frequently heard in discussions of utilitarianism, which is held, through its principle of
aggregation, to violate our recognition of the discreteness of
moral persons – and we shall return to this issue later. But whether
directly, in celebration of autonomy, or indirectly, by way of the
refutation of utilitarianism, such arguments highlight the conceptual linkage between the notion of the person as a separate and
self-governing agent and the normative language of rights.
Take Dagger’s claim at its most ambitious. Is the value of autonomy strong enough or clear enough for us to be conﬁdent that it
can deliver a full derivation of human rights? There are certainly

161

RIGHTS

human rights which seem to manifest the value of autonomy. In
the case of the right to life, if we construe this as requiring others
not to kill us, it is easy, too easy perhaps, to see why killing us
would violate our autonomy. An autonomous life is a life after all.
No life, no autonomy – just as the most effective way to stop me
breathing is to kill me stone dead. Suppose we think of the right to
life as a positive claim right. Again, I won’t be autonomous (or
much else, apart from a corpse) if you deny me the life-saving medicine. If there is an oddity here, and I think there is, it lies in the
thought that what is wrong with killing a person is the denial of
their autonomy. Take someone who is not autonomous. Whatever
capacities underly autonomy, rationality say, or the ability to
abstract from and appraise, then control, her desires: if these are
absent through some psychological condition, the wrong of killing
her cannot be a function of the denial of her autonomy. Whatever
horrible example we have in mind – the baby, the severely handicapped adult or the demented old person – theory has got out of
hand if we deny them the right to life which is accorded to other
(more real?) persons. And most readers will recognize an ad hoc
solution in the claim that to kill them would be wrong, but for
reasons other than that they have a right to life which we claim for
ourselves – as though to kill us would be to double the wrong
which is inﬂicted on such poor souls, or be wrong for more reasons.
Think, to make a different point, of my right to physical integrity which would be violated were you to punch me on the nose as
you passed me in the street. You hit me and pass on. I clear myself
up and make my way home. I can think of lots of reasons why you
have done me wrong. Your violence has cost me – some pain and a
dry-cleaner’s bill to take the blood off my suit. Have you diminished my capacity for self-governance? Have you altered my plan of
life? You may or may not have done. If you reduce me to a timid,
housebound wreck, you surely have. But I may not be thus affected.
I may regard a mugger’s assault as yet another cost to be borne by
those unfortunates like myself who, all things considered, choose
to work in the inner city. In such a case, I may well deem that my
rights have been violated yet regard my autonomy as intact. I may
resolve not to alter my route to work. Don’t let these people win, I
say, sensibly or otherwise, whistling in the wind.
There are clearly wrongs done to individuals which may impair

162

RIGHTS

or eliminate their autonomy which are not wrongs only, or primarily so, on just these grounds. And there are violations of rights
which may, but may not, violate their autonomy. My hunch is this:
if we construe respect for rights as respecting autonomy and then
think of the violation of autonomy on Kantian grounds, as treating folks not as ends but as means merely, of course my rights are
violated when you treat me as a punchbag. But then (and this is
also a thought many Kantians endorse) this is the mark of all
wrong-doing.34 This conclusion strikes me as too strong (as does
the lesser claim associated with Nozick and Dworkin that all
political morality lies within the domain of persons’ rights).
At bottom, my worry is that the value of autonomy is being
asked to do too much work when it is employed as the foundational
value of all ascriptions of human rights. If one uses a thin (Kantian) conception of autonomy, the line of derivation from the claim
that persons are ends-in-themselves to the justiﬁcation of human
rights is likely to be too attenuated to be convincing. If one uses a
thick conception of autonomy – and we have seen how Dagger
ampliﬁes the core Kantian insights – the autonomous life becomes,
quite generally, the life well led, a life distinguished by plans, projects, relationships and ideals. If we demand: Which plans, projects etc. . . . count as expressive of autonomy? we can expect both
a formal and a substantive answer. The formal answer may restrict
plans and projects to those that are compatible with others’ pursuit of their plans and projects; my autonomy should not be purchased at the cost of the autonomy of others. This strikes me as
overly restrictive. Why should Jane not interfere with Jill’s pursuit
of the relationship of her choosing if they’ve both selected Jack as
the best father for their children? The substantive answer to the
question will require an inspection of candidate projects and
ideals to see if they pass muster. What tests do we have available?
I’m sure there are plenty. One question to be asked concerns the
harmfulness of the canvassed project or ideal. Remember, as we
noticed in Chapter 3, it isn’t a good feature of a career of child
abuse that it is autonomously pursued. Racial supremacy is
another rotten conception of the good life, but if it is mine own,
can I call in the value of autonomy to support me in its pursuit?
Surely not.
None of this is meant to demonstrate that human rights cannot

163

RIGHTS

be justiﬁed in terms of the autonomy of the agent who wishes her
deliberations and activities to be protected. When agents reﬂect on
their successes and failures, it is important in many cases that the
endeavours they have pursued be identiﬁably their own. Nothing is
more saddening than the guilt or shame felt by the child who has
failed to live up to her parents’ excessive expectations. The erosion
of self-respect, the developing sense of personal inadequacy in the
face of others’ improper expectations or unrealistic standards is
genuinely tragic because the ﬂaw is unreal, though the personal
consequences may be devastating. We argued before that a parent’s
imposition of life goals on a child represents a severe breach of
that child’s autonomy where the child internalizes the parental
ambitions at a crucial point in her development. This familiar
aetiology of personal desperation tells us much about the real
value of autonomy.
The thought that moral agents are self-governing, that they have
their own lives to lead, their own ideals to formulate and pursue,
should not be represented as a bloodless ontological truth
reﬂected in the metaphysics of morality. Or at least it should not
be represented thus for the purposes of deriving some speciﬁcation
of human rights. The ideal of personal autonomy that is violated
by the sad stories I have sketched serves perfectly well for the
delineation of some human rights. It is a beautiful but sensitive
plant, concealed as effectively by heavyweight philosophical
apparatus as it is destroyed by strong alien intrusion. It is vulnerable to well-meaning family aspirations, peer pressure, mechanisms of social conformity, as well as the designs of states (or their
representative politicians) to generate a well-structured labour
force. All of these (and many other) agencies of coercion stand
between the vulnerable person and her achievement of a decent
and satisfying life. Autonomy, thus described, demands a manifesto
of human rights, but it would be a mistake to understand all
human rights as having their grounding in individual autonomy.
Are there any human rights which cannot be derived from the
value of autonomy, or not from the value of autonomy alone? I
think it is counterintuitive, as I have argued, to claim that the right
to life which is violated by murder or the right to physical integrity
which is violated by assault derive from some story about how
these actions violate autonomy. I think it is just as misleading to

164

RIGHTS

claim that the political rights derive from autonomy alone. Of
course the autonomous agent will wish to have powers of participation in democratic forums, but the exercise of citizens’ powers in
activities such as voting, speaking up and marching with others is
a social performance more than a personal project. To anticipate
the argument of Chapter 7, it is we, the people, who so act, in
concert with each other. Democracy may be represented as a stage
on which solitary actors strut their stuff in a public display of
private aspirations, but this is an impoverished representation of a
most likely deluded activity. Politics, like church-going, is one of
those activities that does not locate the sense that it is worthwhile
in individual evaluations of the projects that make sense of them.
Rights and interests
Persons have interests. Some are weighty, some are trivial. Some
are idiosyncratic, some are just about universal. These categories
evidently intersect. Some interests are so important and so widespread that they give rise to claims against others that these interests be served. The resultant claims may be against others, that
they not kill, hurt or steal from us, or against governments that
they provide protective services. For Mill, a right is a valid claim
on society for protection. ‘To have a right, then, is, I conceive, to
have something which society ought to defend me in the possession
of.’35 Mill’s example was that of security, ‘to everyone’s feelings the
most vital of all interests’.36 And this reminds us, though this was
not Mill’s intention, that crucial rights may be either or both,
negative and positive, depending on the terms in which they are
spelled out. On this account, to have a right is to have a justiﬁable
claim against others that some interest be protected or promoted.
What rights, then, do we have? All will depend on the interests that
are cited as demanding protection and promotion. In some cases,
as Mill’s example of security suggests, these will be universal. In
which case, they may well be deemed human rights. In other cases,
they will be particular or conditional. The rights distinctive of
members of a club are examples.
Talk of interests is irremediably vague. Small wonder that
dispute about rights is endemic and that new claims of right

165

RIGHTS

proliferate daily. A novel example, which I suspect I am bringing to
the attention of readers for the ﬁrst time, is the right of adults
born through a process of artiﬁcial insemination to be granted
knowledge of the identity of the sperm donor. Clearly the ﬁrst step
claimants to such a right must take if they are to have it recognized, is to convince others of the importance of the interest they
have in acquiring such knowledge. The phenomenon of ‘rights
inﬂation’, well described by L.W. Sumner,37 witnesses the variety of
interests that individuals attest as grounds for the claims they
make on others. Rights collide and compete as differing interests
struggle for prominence in policy debates. The interest a natural
parent takes in bringing up her child may conﬂict with the child’s
interest in having a healthy, supportive upbringing – and courts
may be asked to adjudicate what emerges as a collision of rights in
terms of laws or principles which establish a hierarchy or ranking
between them. ‘The rights of the child should be decisive’, some
will say.
Problems of two kinds are foregrounded by the conceptual
association of rights and interests: philosophical problems concerning whether interests are subjective or objective,38 and moral
problems concerning the importance or weight of the declared
interest and its implications for the duties which the claimed right
imposes on others. Problems of the ﬁrst kind, I put to one side
(which is not to derogate their importance). Problems of the second kind seem endless and intractable. But that should be taken as
an incentive for effort rather than a counsel of despair. Claims of
right are not self-validating. It is an important feature of the view
that takes rights claims as expressions of interests which warrant
promotion and protection that it tells us where to look when disputes are to be settled: examine the interests which ground the
claims.
Interests, we should note, may be individual interests or group
interests. This distinction may seem misguided. Whether interests
are taken as subjective or objective, aren’t we always thinking, at
bottom, of the interests of individuals? Who or what else could
take or have an interest? There is evidently some connection
between the interests of individuals and the interests of groups. It
would be astonishing if one were to attest a group interest which
bore no relation to any identiﬁable interest of the members of the

166

RIGHTS

group. It is hard to think of a project being in the interests of a
some ﬁrm without it being in the interests of the shareholders or
of a policy being in the interest of some nation without it being in
the interests of citizens. It is generally supposed that a ﬁrm’s
interests will be identical with those of a majority of shareholders.
The national interest may be similarly decomposed into the interests of most citizens. On this view, if you wish to determine the
group interest, consult or otherwise seek evidence concerning the
interests of the members. Ask them, or otherwise ﬁnd out, what
their interests consist in. How else could one determine the
interests of groups?
This direct approach is philosophically tainted. The common
sense which underlies it is infected with a species of individualism
which incorporates a distinctive and controversial philosophical
view of the relationship of individuals to the groups of which they
are members. The central feature of this view is that groups are
identiﬁed as instrumental to the achievement of antecedent individual interests. Group interests, on this account, amount to a
concatenation of individual interests. The decision procedures of
such groups will be designed to give effect to these individual
interests.
This view is doubtless true of many groups – but not of all, or
indeed most, once groups have become stable. A useful distinction
here is that between natural and artiﬁcial groups (or associations).
Artiﬁcial groups enlist members on the basis of a declared prospectus. Standardly, membership will be voluntary, as will be continued subscription. The purpose of membership will be to pursue
an individual interest which is more effectively achieved when
individuals act in concert. As soon as the convener, secretary and
treasurer are in place, a division of labour can increase efﬁciency
and effectiveness in the use of resources to the common end. One
can expect such groups to come into existence as soon as common
interests are identiﬁed and to disband when the object of interest
is secured. The evident mistake is to suppose that all groups are of
this kind.
Natural groups are those groups of which agents ﬁnd themselves
as members, willy-nilly. Families and clans are obvious examples.
The nation-state is a controversial contender for natural status.
Aristotle thought that the state in the form of the Greek polis was

167

RIGHTS

natural – man is zoon politikon, a creature of the polis, because the
polis is the minimum-sized unit of human self-sufﬁciency.39 Hobbes,
by contrast, believed the state to be an artiﬁcial group (or person)
– the creation of individuals with a congruent set of purposes
through their individual pursuit of the preservation of their lives
and ‘commodious living’.40 This distinction of natural and artiﬁcial groups is too complex for us to pursue here, but one implication is noteworthy in respect of the interests group members
attest. Artiﬁcial groups may be identiﬁed in terms of the antecedent interests which membership promotes. In the case of natural groups, some members’ interests may be consequent upon the
fact of their group membership. It is because they are members
of such and such a group that they form certain interests; their
interest in the well-being of the group itself will be the most
conspicuous example.
This pair of distinctions, between natural and artiﬁcial groups,
and interests formed antecedently to or consequent upon membership, conceals a good deal of overlap. Humans notoriously form
groups for speciﬁc purposes, sometimes explicitly self-interested
but often not so, and then ﬁnd the group which has been created
develops a life of its own. Parents form or join a parents association to promote the better education of their children, then ﬁnd
that the habit of association generates social activities which have
a pleasure of their own independently of the original purposes of
association. Some folks seem born clubbers, keen to join, organize
and serve groups in which they enlist. Groucho Marx, keen to
avoid any club which would have him as a member, seems very
much the exception. Group membership forms as well as serves
individual interests, even in the case of those whose original
interest is self-interest. Hegel describes this process as the mediation of the particular through the universal. It is distinctive of
Civil Society, the social sphere in which family members seek their
particular welfare in the world of work.41 I suspect that only those
groups formed to serve very narrow and temporary interests can
escape this dynamic. But the implication is clear. Groups can form
individuals’ interests just as effectively as the interests of individuals lead them to form groups. Where this happens, we can
speak intelligibly of a group interest. And where groups express a
distinctive group interest, we should expect them to claim that

168

RIGHTS

these interests be protected and perhaps promoted as of right. The
dynamic of transformation between individual interest and group
interest can make it very difﬁcult to establish whether the rights
which are claimed in consequence are group rights or individual
rights. Imagine a religious congregation which wishes to build a
place of worship amidst a community of non-believers. Suppose
planning permission is denied on grounds of bigotry. ‘We tolerate
the Muslims here, but let them not try to build a mosque!’, I once
heard said by a benighted Presbyterian. When the congregation
appeals, citing their right to worship together in an appropriate
building, is this a group right or a collection of individual rights
that is being asserted? Only subscription to a mistaken view concerning individuals’ interests would lead one to conclude that
there couldn’t be a group right at stake.
Rights and utility
Interests, as we have seen, may be widespread and important.
Rights claims, whether established in international conventions or
municipal legislation, are the favoured method of protecting and
promoting them. How can interests, as the objects of rights, work
to justify institutional provision? The simplest answer, though not
the only one, is to register the interests which rights serve in a
consequentialist, broadly utilitarian, calculation. Persons have
interests as individuals or in virtue of their membership of groups.
Consult these interests, expressed in terms of the best value theory, and enquire whether their fulﬁlment through institutional
provision maximizes utility. If it does, one has established a moral
right, construed as a claim against the institution designers that
recognition of the particular interests be accorded by the most
effective institutional structures. Generally, the most effective
structures will be the legal processes of individual nation-states.
Sometimes international legal structures, as in the recently established International Criminal Court, may be judged the best way of
protecting human rights on a worldwide basis by prosecuting
those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes.42 Some speciﬁc provisions, derivable from more general
rights may ﬁnd informal protection within positive morality.

169

RIGHTS

To see how this project might work, take the example I mentioned earlier of a novel rights claim – the right of adults born
following artiﬁcial insemination to be informed of the identity of
the donor. Those who claim such a right will declare an interest in
knowing the identity of their natural father. They will cite their
ignorance as a deprivation and source of suffering. They will
anticipate the possible pleasure of future acquaintance. Those
who oppose such a right will argue that the beneﬁts to recipients
of AID (parent(s) and perhaps child, too) will be reduced as donors
are frightened off by the prospect of future telephone calls from
developed embryos for whose creation they have some measure of
responsibility. And one could go on, recording the good and bad
news for the different persons likely to be affected by a policy of
recording details to which putative rights bearers claim access. If,
after registering the effects of such institutional innovation on all
parties who have an interest in such affairs, it is judged that disclosure is more beneﬁcial overall than secrecy, then a case has
been made for a moral right. Public recognition of this right
requires that the institutions which most effectively secure disclosure be put in place. Or not, as the case may be. It should be
noted that this process of calculation requires that everyone’s
interests be taken into account. This includes those who claim e.g.
that their right to AID would be compromised or their right to
privacy would be violated by a process of disclosure. These rights,
too, are decomposed into the registration of the interests their
rights protect.
The variety of consequentialism which justiﬁes the assignment
of rights is evidently indirect.43 Once rights are established,
actions are wrong if they involve violations of claims of right or
permissible if they are within the sphere of a legitimate rights
claim. If it is granted, on grounds of general utility, say, that persons have a right to the exclusive use of private property, it is
permissible for folk to use their own property but impermissible for
others to do so without the owner’s permission. This derivation of
rights and the implied verdicts in the case of particular actions is
no stronger than the variety of consequentialism which underpins
it. I shall put to one side here general criticisms of the utilitarian
project and shall address directly a few central objections to the
utilitarian defence of rights.

170

RIGHTS

First, let us tackle a number of slogans. Rights, as we have seen,
are claims made by individuals or groups. In the simplest, albeit
misleading, case, they amount to claims that the individuals’ (or
groups’) moral boundaries be respected. Historically they are
linked to a burgeoning individualism. So rights presuppose ‘the
distinction of persons . . . the separateness of life and experience’
(Rawls),44 ‘this root idea, namely, that there are different individuals with separate lives’ (Nozick).45 The implication of this position for Nozick is that rights are ‘side-constraints’ on the pursuit
of goals.
These claims have assumed an enormous importance in discussions of utilitarianism and rights since many of those who have
taken them to be obviously true have also believed (as Rawls and
Nozick believe) that they are incompatible with utilitarianism in
so far as it incorporates aggregative and maximizing elements.
Aggregation and maximization may reveal the best policy to be one
which trades off the interests of some persons to achieve maximal
well-being overall. One does not need to be a card-carrying utilitarian to recognize the weakness of arguments as sketchy as these.
One of the distinctive features of utilitarianism is its insistence
that everyone’s interests be counted, and counted equally, in the
aggregation. ‘Everybody to count for one, nobody for more than
one’, was Mill’s statement of the Benthamite orthodoxy.46 Just one
of the reasons why the classical utilitarians were deemed philosophical radicals was their insistence that the interests of all be
computed in a judgement of the common good. No one’s distinctive
or separate interest, however idiosyncratic, should be ignored.
This thought is bolstered by the obvious truth that the goods to be
reckoned in any calculation are goods to individuals. Whether
they be computed in terms of happiness, pleasure net pain, desiresatisfaction or elements of an objective list, individuals are the
only possible beneﬁciaries. The thought that groups might have
interests antecedently to the interests of individuals comprising
the groups does not challenge this conclusion. Wherever the interests come from, the utility achieved by satisfying them will accrue
to individuals severally. If the separateness of persons is recognized in the calculation of utility, and if the calculations of utility
support the recognition of individual rights, what reason have we
for concluding that the utilitarian project fails to recognize the

171

RIGHTS

fact that different individuals have their separate lives to lead? For
this conclusion to be justiﬁed there must be some other respect in
which the separateness of persons is not recognized.
Before we investigate this further claim, let us look at another
slogan – one deriving from Ronald Dworkin who argues, famously,
that rights are trumps; in particular, rights claims trump competing judgements of utility. In Dworkin’s words, ‘Rights are best
understood as trumps over some background justiﬁcation for political decisions that states a goal for the community as a whole’.47
The ‘background justiﬁcation’ that Dworkin has in mind is utilitarianism. The metaphor of trumps, for those ignorant of the rules
of whist, implies that no matter how grand the advantage of a
policy in point of utility, if, in a speciﬁc case, implementation of
that policy violates rights, it is unjustiﬁable. No matter how grand
one’s card in the other three suits (the ace of spades, perhaps) if
clubs are trumps, the two of clubs wins the trick.
As with the other slogans, there is an argument behind it – and
as with them, I shall ignore the details. It is important to see what
this argument cannot establish. It cannot show that it is somehow
analytic or conceptually integral to rights claims that they countervail arguments from utility. The utilitarian case for rights is
cogent, though it may fail if the background theory is found
unacceptable. It can’t fall at the ﬁrst hurdle on the grounds that it
proposes to evaluate rights whose credentials are somehow
immune to utilitarian inspection, that it is improper, conceptually
speaking, to bring rights to the bar of utility.
There is a further implication of Dworkin’s claim that rights
trump utility that needs to be pinned down. Recall – if clubs are
trumps, the two of clubs beats the ace of spades. This suggests that
the meanest right, if granted, defeats arguments from utility that
purport to justify its violation in the particular case. However
much disutility may accrue, the right should be respected. Now the
utilitarian can agree with this, so long as the right is in place and
justiﬁed by good utilitarian reasons. The detailed speciﬁcation of
the right will make clear the scope of rights claims. Suppose we all
agree, utilitarians and non-utilitarians alike, that a right to private property should be recognized. We can expect the detail of
any such right to incorporate speciﬁc exclusions. The state will
claim the right (eminent domain) to requisition farmland for the

172

RIGHTS

construction of airports during an emergency, or a civic authority
may have powers of compulsory purchase to build a city bypass. All
zoning or planning regulations articulate, through limitations, the
contours of speciﬁc rights. Once the cluster of rules deemed optimum have been set out and accepted, there will be no provision for
arbitrary executive breach of them, as Rawls pointed out in ‘Two
Concepts of Rules’. At no trumps, the lead of the ace of spades will
win the trick against the play of the two of clubs, but if the rules of
the game establish a trump suit, and if clubs are trumps, not so. All
depends on the precise rules of the game. One cannot insist that
the rules of whist are distinctively non-utilitarian, because they
make provision for a trump suit.
In a similar vein, it has been suggested by David Lyons that the
utilitarian cannot capture the distinctive moral force of rights
claims.48 Call the moral theory which does capture the moral force
of rights claims T. I see no reason to exclude the possibility that
application of the principle of utility might not yield exactly the
same set of institutional arrangements as T. This is clearly a contingent matter, since which institution ﬁnds utilitarian favour
depends on the facts of the matter. So suppose both T and utilitarian reasoning support a given structure of rights. In this case the
thought that the utilitarian cannot capture the moral force of
rights boils down to the hypothesis that utilitarianism licenses a
discretion on the part of ofﬁcials to break the rules if they judge
that this will produce utility. I see no reason why the utilitarian
should accept this. Whatever discretion ofﬁcials may exercise will
be laid down within the system of rules – and, ex hypothesi, these
are the same for both theories.
Some are not content with the contingency at the heart of utilitarian theories. Which institutions we endorse evidently depends
on how the facts pan out. The utilitarian cannot deny this element
of contingency. To settle the issue we should need to confront the
utilitarian position with an alternative, as with T above, which
derives rights in all their speciﬁcity from different foundations,
and we should need to inspect the factual credentials of utilitarian
proposals. This latter is a massive task, but we should not expect
theory T to ﬁnd straightforward a priori grounding and direct
application. On my understanding of rights, T would have to bear
on the interests that rights protect. This is an analytic feature of

173

RIGHTS

rights claims and it severely limits the range of alternative
derivations.
Often a different point is being made by those who deem rights
to be trumps or possessed of some distinctive moral force which
belies their grounding in utility. Suppose, as before, that both utilitarianism and theory T yield exactly the same set of rules granting
rights. The claim may be that rights as trumps have such moral
force as to warrant respect even in the face of catastrophe. Respect
rights though the heavens fall. Respect rights no matter what
amount of human interests are sacriﬁced thereby.49 If rights are
protective of human interests, such claims look preposterous. If
rights are trumps in the sense of being absolute, we are better off
without them. But I leave the reader to judge.
The no-theory theory
Before we close our discussion of rights, I want to mention one
further theory. Let me begin with a story from Arthur Danto:
In the afterwash of 1968, I found myself a member of a group
charged with working out the disciplinary procedures for acts
against my university. It was an exemplary group from the perspective of representation so urgent at the time: administrators,
tenured and non-tenured faculty, graduate and undergraduate
students, men and women, whites and blacks. We all wondered,
nevertheless, what right we had to do what was asked of us, and
a good bit of time went into expressing our insecurities. Finally,
a man from the law-school said, with the tried patience of someone required to explain what should be as plain as day, and in a
tone of voice I can still hear: ‘This is the way it is with rights.
You want’em, so you say you got’em, and if nobody says you
don’t then you do.’ In the end he was right. We worked a code
out which nobody liked, but in debating it the community
acknowledged the rights. Jefferson did not say that it was selfevident that there were human rights and which they were: he
said we hold this for self-evident. He chose this locution mainly,
I think, because he was more certain we have them than he was
of any argument alleged to entail them, or of any premises from

174

RIGHTS

which their existence was to follow. This is the way it is with
rights. We declare we have them, and see if they are
recognized.50
From one point of view, this no-theory theory is a counsel of
despair. Suppose we are impressed by claims of human rights and
yet, being philosophically scrupulous, we despair of establishing
a foundation for them which we ﬁnd convincing. We can see sense
in various foundationalist projects: for some rights claims, in some
circumstances, autonomy serves as the value which rights promote; for other rights, in different circumstances, utility promises
convincing grounds; for still other rights, whose force we acknowledge, we may ﬁnd ourselves stumped – no justiﬁcation seems
to serve. Where we accept justiﬁcationary claims we may still be
hesitant to propose that we have to hand a convincing theory
which can be deployed across the board. At this point, the thought
that rights claim are an ethical bedrock, resistant to further
exploration may look attractive. We can accord them the status of
ﬁrst principles, perhaps clouding the waters further by speaking
of them as intuitions.
This would be to misread the point of Danto’s homily, since it
fails to recognize a distinctive feature of the logical grammar of
rights – that they are generally asserted as claims on others. If
others acknowledge the force of claims of right (perhaps, as is
likely, they make similar claims, themselves, against others) that is
all that is necessary for the rights to be established. All parties are
involved in a practice of making, acknowledging and respecting
rights claims.
If this is true, if rights are claimed, acknowledged and respected
amongst a community, no further argument is needed to establish
their provenance. The obvious objection to this strategy is that the
right in question, on any occasion of its assertion, may be denied.
So it looks as though rights exist at the whim of tyrants or bloodyminded opponents. Just one determined nay-sayer on Danto’s
committee would have been sufﬁcient to block progress.
The defender of the no-theory theory need not be disheartened
at this point. The obvious resources will be history and sociology.
Nobody, any more, I claim conﬁdently, accepts the arguments in
favour of slavery advanced in the seventeenth century. The various

175

RIGHTS

documents attesting human rights are established as the norms of
international and municipal political correctness. Folks just do
make claims of individual and group rights nowadays, expecting,
often correctly, that they will meet with sufﬁciently widespread
acceptance. And so rights have emerged alongside the increasing
embarrassment of their public detractors, composing a central
ingredient of acceptable political rhetoric. Even the most
benighted political conservative has lost the folk-memory or myth
of a society with the sort of organic civic unity that precludes
claims of right. Heirs of the Reformation, of the anti-slavery
debates, of the struggles for the achievement of the rights of man
and the citizen, we are all of us bloody-minded enough to keep
cognizance of our rights.
The no-theory theory may look depressingly like a no-argument
theory, impotent in the face of persistent dispute. If one can’t get
the dissenter to acknowledge the fact of her claiming the rights
she repudiates, how is advance possible? This is the point at which
a battery of other arguments kick in. We can try, ad hominem, the
Lockean strategy, the Kantian strategy, the Millian strategy:
whatever argumentative path will take the dissenter from her
premises to our conclusion. Pluralism may be the enemy of philosophical tidiness but it is a friend to the project of ﬁnding
agreement.

176

Chapter 5

Distributive justice

In this chapter we shall address the problem of distributive justice,
the vexed issue of how wealth and income, goods and services
should be distributed or allocated amongst the population of a
state. There are many candidate principles that may be applied,
some of which I discuss explicitly in what follows, but before we
advance any further, I should bring to your attention a restriction
which I have placed on this investigation which you may well judge
to be arbitrary. For many, the problem of social justice amounts in
practice to the social question of how a society should cope with
poverty, assuming that the poor are always with us, that even in the
richest nations pockets of seemingly uneradicable poverty exist
alongside extremes of wealth. This was noticed by the earliest
philosophers to observe the social mechanics of developing capitalism. Hegel, to take one example, tells us that ‘civil society affords
a spectacle of extravagance and misery as well as of the physical
and ethical corruption common to both’.1
But if the co-existence of great wealth and deep poverty is a
problem within states, it is a much greater problem between states

177

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

or between the peoples of different states. In the face of these
dismal facts, one important philosophical question is this: are
these different problems – one of social justice, say, the other of
global or international justice – or are we confronted by the same
problem arising in different contexts? Relatedly, are the philosophical principles which one might employ to judge the justice of
these different manifestations of radical inequality the same in
each case or are different principles needed to address them and to
prescribe redistribution where that is deemed necessary? It is fair
to say that the problems of international distributive justice are in
their academic infancy, though already one can identify utilitarian, Kantian and contractualist approaches.2 With great
reluctance, I shall put these questions to one side, trusting, perhaps naïvely, that one will have made a start to the consideration
of them if one has deliberated carefully about social justice within
states.
I shall begin the discussion by investigating one of the latest
entries to the ﬁeld of competing theories, the entitlement theory
of Robert Nozick. I begin here, anachronistically, because I believe
Nozick’s account is the simplest and most straightforward account
of social justice; if not the best-founded, it most readily captures
our untutored intuitions concerning who can validly claim the
right to what property. As we shall see, these intuitions will need
to be corrected.

Entitlement
With luck, you will own the book you are presently reading. Let me
assume so. How do you vindicate your claims of ownership if these
are challenged? ‘Is that your copy?’, someone may ask. If you are
careful and well-organized, the issue of proper ownership will
likely be settled as soon as you produce a receipt. This may not
fully allay the enquirer’s worries. She may be investigating your
earnings and wonder how you acquired the wherewithal for this
expensive purchase. So you bring out your pay-slips and bank
statement and show that the item was purchased within your publicly declared means. What more can you be expected to do? The
challenge was made and met. You have shown that you are entitled

178

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

to the copy you possess. You have demonstrated that it is your
private property.
Nozick’s theory of entitlement
Concealed in this episode is a theory of entitlement, associated in
recent times with Robert Nozick. On Nozick’s account, a distribution of holdings is just if it meets three conditions:
(1) Justice in Acquisition: ‘A person who acquires a holding in
accordance with the principle of justice in acquisition is
entitled to that holding.’
(2) Justice in Transfer: ‘A person who acquires a holding in
accordance with the principle of justice in transfer, from
someone else entitled to the holding, is entitled to the holding.’
(3) Rectiﬁcation of Injustice: ‘No one is entitled to a holding
except by (repeated) applications of (1) and (2).’3
The principles of just acquisition concern the ‘legitimate ﬁrst
moves’. Acquisition, here, means ﬁrst or original acquisition of
goods which are owned either by nobody, or else inclusively, by
everyone in common. The principles of just transfer concern ‘the
legitimate means of moving from one distribution to another’;
standard examples would include sale or gift. Principles of rectiﬁcation operate when holdings are illegitimate in respect of acquisition or transfer. They would require, for example, that stolen
goods be returned to the legitimate owner. If we apply the bones of
this entitlement theory to the episode described above, where your
possession of this book was challenged, you vindicate your possession by application of the principles of justice in transfer when
you give evidence of purchase. Had the book turned out to be
stolen or kept following a loan, restitution to the owner would be
prescribed by application of justice in rectiﬁcation. As Nozick
points out, ‘the entitlement theory of justice in distribution is historical; whether a distribution is just depends upon how it came
about’.4
Nozick’s entitlement theory serves as a mighty critical instrument. All manner of theories of distribution are rejected as they

179

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

are revealed to be inconsistent with it, as we shall see later. The
oddity of his presentation is that, having given a general outline of
the form of the entitlement theory, he should do so little to give it
substance by way of a detailed speciﬁcation and defence of the
three principles. ‘I shall not attempt that task here’,5 he tells us,
and to my knowledge he has never returned to it. What he does
have to say concerning the ﬁrst principle, for example, is a
repudiation of Locke’s attempt to vindicate original acquisition.
Nonetheless, if there is a default position concerning the justice
of any particular distribution of private property, Nozick has evidently given us the structure of it. Any theory of distributive justice must, when fully articulated and consistently applied, give rise
to a speciﬁcation of who owns what property which can be adjudicated by reference to the legitimacy of the transactions which produced the given distribution. Whether these transactions amount
to the private agreements on which Nozick concentrates, i.e. gifts,
bequests, sales etc. or government transfers, which Nozick deems
illegitimate, e.g. social security grants or payments, state pensions
or whatever, some story must be available to be recited when holdings are challenged. If a system of private property is held to be
unjust, this must entail that some members of a community are not
entitled, vis-à-vis the range of permissible stories which may be
told, to the goods that they claim.6 Justice will be done when the
goods are reallocated in accordance with an appropriate scheme of
rectiﬁcation.
The glamour of Nozick’s proposal derived from its link to
common-sense intuitions governing who owns what, as exempliﬁed
by my story concerning your book, together with its promise to
undercut reams of published debate on the subject of justice. All
readers will be familiar with the thought that a just distribution is
an equal distribution. Some may have moved on to the thought that
we can improve on equality if the worst off in a society with an
unequal distribution are better off than they would be under conditions of equality. Others will insist that a just distribution will
be responsive to claims of need; others, still, may require that desert and merit be recognized. Philosophically tainted contributors
to the debate will argue that no distribution can be just which does
not maximize utility.
Nozick himself was well aware of the power of his entitlement

180

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

theory to counter theories developed from intuitions or theoretical
stances of the kind rehearsed above. He contrasts his historical
conception of justice with current time-slice principles which
employ a structural principle to determine whether a distribution
is just. A current time-slice principle will ask not: How has this
distribution come about? but: Does this distribution achieve a speciﬁc goal or end-state, does it exemplify a speciﬁc pattern? Any
theory of the sort that begins: ‘from each according to his _____
and concludes: ‘to each according to his____’, is a patterned theory, as is equality of wealth and income.
An unusual example of a patterned principle is the one Hume
deemed hopeless, if well-meaning: ‘to each according to his moral
virtue.’ Nozick’s point is that such a principle commits us to an
inspection of the current distribution of goods to individuals to
see whether or not it accords with this principle. If it does – the
more virtue a person displays, the more goods they hold in comparison to others of lesser virtue – the distribution is just, regardless of how that distribution came about. If we ﬁnd persons of lesser
virtue holding more goods than the more virtuous, the distribution
is unjust, again regardless of the provenance of that distribution.
Nozick now goes on to reveal what he takes to be a systematic
weakness in principles of this form.
He proposes a thought-experiment. Take your favoured pattern
of just distribution (D1) – not wealth proportionate to virtue, but,
say (more familiar, if equally implausible) strict equality of wealth
– and suppose it is exempliﬁed. Now, Wilt Chamberlain signs for a
basketball team that will pay him twenty-ﬁve cents for each fan
admitted to home games and so collects $250,000 by the end of the
season from the million fans who have willingly turned up to watch
him. (Multiply the total by twenty or more to make it realistic in
terms of current prices and earnings.) Is he entitled to these earnings? Clearly, the resulting distribution (D2) is unjust as measured
by the principle of equality. Each fan has $25 less and Wilt has
$250,000 more. Yet ‘each of these persons chose to give twenty-ﬁve
cents of their money to Chamberlain. They could have spent it on
going to the movies, or on candy bars, or on copies of Dissent
magazine, or of Monthly Review.’7 The implication of patterned
theories of justice is that, since this society has moved from a just
to an unjust pattern of holdings, this position needs to be rectiﬁed:

181

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

most easily by conﬁscating Chamberlain’s earnings and restoring
them to the willing punters. Nozick’s conclusion looks devastating: ‘The general point illustrated by the Wilt Chamberlain
example . . . is that no end-state principle or distributional patterned principle of justice can be continuously realized without
continuous interference with people’s lives.’8 Liberty upsets
patterns.
This conclusion should not be judged to be as iconoclastic as
Nozick would have it. Those who value liberty may be disturbed at
the prospect of ‘continuous interference with people’s lives’. But if
they reﬂect that the form taken by interference is likely to be taxation and that, for most folks, ‘continuous’ means every time they
receive a pay-slip or purchase a meal, they may judge that they do
not experience this continuous interference as a signiﬁcant loss of
liberty. The value of keeping one’s pre-tax earnings may not be
negligible, the payment of income or sales taxes may be a burden,
but most folks get used to it. Perhaps they notice that it is those
who earn much the most who gripe the most – and who are most
likely to emigrate to some tax-haven. For many people, the pain
of paying their tax bills is as irritating as the pain of trafﬁc
lights switching to red whenever they are in a hurry, of pedestrians appearing on a zebra crossing just as they are about to drive
across it. They see tax cuts as a notable gain rather than an
insigniﬁcant reduction of an unjustiﬁed impost. As we discovered
when thinking about liberty, not every restriction or impediment
or interference weighs signiﬁcantly on the scales.
Of course, those who are sanguine about taxation, seeing it,
alongside death, as the fate of all mortals, may be underestimating
the moral iniquity of their predicament. They may be the sort of
victims of a prevailing ideology that a quick dose of smart philosophy may cure. They may read and think, and recognize Nozick
as a philosophical faith-healer. ‘Taxation of earnings from labor is
on a par with forced labor’, Nozick tells us.9 I doubt it. What’s
more, I think it would be seriously impertinent to ask those who
have undertaken forced labour – in the Gulag, in Nazi factories, in
the Cultural Revolution in China, in the ﬁelds of Cambodia –
whether they agree.
It’s fair to combat rhetoric with rhetoric. But if an argument
reads as truly sinister in the light of one’s antecedent political

182

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

commitments, the philosopher should cough discreetly and get
down to the business of exposing its weaknesses. One should put
the rhetoric to one side and concentrate on the detail of the arguments. There are good arguments against Nozick’s position and
they should be carefully rehearsed.
The best way to start is to take up the entitlement theory. Its ﬁrst
element is the theory of just acquisition. Acquirers are ﬁrst holders, ﬁrst occupants. What was the status of, say, land before it was
ﬁrst taken into possession? There are two answers to this question,
each of which makes ﬁrst occupancy a puzzle. The ﬁrst answer is
that the land belonged to no one. Anyone could legitimately walk
across it or pick mushrooms from it. The ﬁrst acquirer then has a
singular moral power. Suppose, as Locke thought, property is
acquired by mixing one’s labour, by working on the unowned land.
We now have the possibility that agents may, by their diligent pursuit of their own interest, create obligations for all others which
hitherto did not exist. A right of ownership having been acquired
by proper means, everyone else is now under a duty to respect the
owner’s exclusive possession.10 What can be the source of such a
radical moral power?
The same question arises even more pointedly when the normative background is not a state of no-ownership, but rather one of
co-ownership. Locke believed that God had granted the world to
mankind in common. Everyone, originally, had inclusive property
rights to the earth, its fruits and its beasts: ‘this being supposed, it
seems to some a very great difﬁculty, how anyone should ever come
to have a Property in any thing’.11 It does indeed, not least since
those who have acquired an obligation in place of a previous inclusive liberty right have demonstrably lost a moral right they could
legitimately claim hitherto. Locke throws a battery of arguments
at the reader to justify a right of original acquisition. Famously,
that property which one has in one’s own person is somehow
annexed to the portion of the world with which one has mixed
one’s labour. Rights of self-ownership are fuelled into the possessions one has created. The metaphors are normatively impotent as
many commentators have seen, including, ironically, Nozick who
asks: ‘why isn’t mixing what I own with what I don’t own a way of
losing what I own rather than a way of gaining what I don’t?’.12 If I
add value to the land, why do I gain the land rather than just the

183

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

added value? Locke’s argument can be read as a claim of desert.
The digger with dirty hands has earned the right to make exclusive
claims. Maybe, but what can justify the losses that everyone else
undertakes? They have done nothing to deserve these. Locke’s
condition, that there be ‘enough, and as good left in common for
others’, counters this objection, but if the ‘others’ are to include
all future possible claimants (and why not?) that condition can
never be met. Distinctively consequentialist arguments are suggested by Locke, too. Had there been no private property (strictly,
had the consent of all the co-owners been required to legitimize
acquisition), mankind would have starved, notwithstanding the
original plenty. Further, private property is a condition for
industriousness from which everyone beneﬁts. These arguments
are promising, but we shall keep them up our sleeve, since if they
do justify original acquisition they may also serve to justify
redistribution and the taxation of Wilt Chamberlain.
The most obvious objection to the employment of arguments
concerning original acquisition to justify present holdings is the
obvious fact that, even if there were arguments strong enough to
justify the would-be property owners simultaneously beneﬁting
themselves and dumping the costs of their acquisition on others, it
would be quite impossible to track down episodes of original
acquisition with respect to most of the goods of this earth. Provenance has vanished. Original acquisition is shrouded behind the
same mists that conceal the Original Contract. If the entitlement
argument is to be taken seriously in the way Nozick suggests,
acquisition refers to literally ﬁrst occupancy, ﬁrst ownership, ﬁrst
title to land and the fruits of it. And no one has a clue about such
ancestral claims.
Suppose we ignore the possibility of claims of justice originating in acquisition. Why can’t we just draw a blank over disputes
that take us back beyond, say, 1750, assuming the legitimacy of
ownership claims at that point and legitimating the present in
terms of legitimate transfers, supposing these are properly
recorded after that date? To simplify massively, suppose further we
are concerned solely with transactions classiﬁed as wages, gifts,
sales and bequests. We must not suppose that transactions of each
of these kinds represent legitimate transfers so long as parties to
them are fully informed and the executions are voluntary and

184

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

properly registered. Take gift, for example. This may look simple,
but there are alternative and incompatible rules in the ﬁeld. One
says: all transfers by gift are legitimate. Another says: transfers by
gift up to the value of £x are legitimate; gifts above that value are
legitimate only if y per cent of the value of the goods is paid by
recipients to the government. Exactly the same structure of alternatives can be articulated in respect of wages, sales and bequests.
How is one to decide which transfer principles are best? One can
say: all subventions from gifts are conﬁscations, all reallocations
of sales receipts are theft, all reapportionment of bequests is
grave-robbing, as one can say that all taxation of earnings from
labour is on a par with forced labour – but saying these things
doesn’t make it so.
The Scots, in a recent constitutional settlement, voted both to
institute a devolved Parliament in Edinburgh and to give that Parliament tax-raising powers in addition to those assumed by Westminster. Does this mean that the Scots are (illegitimately?) forcing
themselves to labour for the beneﬁt of those amongst them who
receive the public services which the taxation funds? Of course,
the fact that a majority of those voting in a referendum supports a
policy of granting their representatives the power to tax does not
settle the philosophical issue. If all taxation violates rights, and if
rights are side-constraints on government action, then no taxation
is justiﬁed. But not even Nozick believes this. Taxation for the
purposes of the nightwatchman, to guard the city walls (defence
expenditure), to keep safe the city streets and protect citizens in
their private homes (law and order), is justiﬁed – and provision for
tax collection must be made.
It follows that one cannot simply wave the ﬂags of the separateness of persons and the importance of autonomous lives to those
who have only one life to lead and watch the proponents of compulsory taxation give up the ﬁght. The substantive issues concern
the boundaries of legitimate compulsory taxation and one cannot
expect these to be derived a priori from foundational moral
principles.
The speciﬁcation of rules of transfer for any given society will
be the work of centuries of careful adjustment to the circumstances of production, distribution and exchange, to the demands
of existent patterns of domesticity and family life, and to the

185

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

details of speciﬁc constitutions governing hierarchies of local and
national political institutions. We can expect these arrangements
to be vindicated by a range of values. We can expect the detailed
rights concerning transfer to cut across one another. Rights of
bequest and rights of inheritance qualify each other. We can
expect the general utility of speciﬁc arrangements to recommend
their institution as rights. What else could vindicate a state’s right
of compulsory purchase as required for the provision of a public
good? We are likely to ﬁnd a distinct value in private property –
which leads us to notice another real weakness in Nozick’s
argument.13
His core intuitions concern the separateness of persons and the
value to each of them of their leading an autonomous life. Respect
for persons on the Kantian model requires us to treat persons as
ends, not as means merely, to echo the Groundwork.14 This is a
vague demand, but assume it can be put to work in central cases. It
evidently proscribes slavery, rape and other non-consensual ways
of using other persons and their bodies to one’s own advantage.
Kant was quite clear that this principle does not govern the way
that we treat the earth, the fruits of the earth and the beasts of the
ﬁeld. These do not possess that rational will which is a necessary
and sufﬁcient condition for treating agents as autonomous
beings.15 Your autonomy is violated if I take one of your kidneys
without your consent, but what rule do I violate if I saw a branch
off a tree or quarry rocks from a mountain? The tree and the hillside have to be attached to someone as property before any harm or
injury is done, and then it is the owner who is wronged, not the
tree or the mountain. So we need to understand property as a mode
of attachment, a relation between persons and things. And we
need to justify the claims that persons make who stand in such a
relation.
One interesting theory in the ﬁeld is that of Hegel. His argument in defence of private property is that private property is
necessary for persons to be free.16 The story is complex, but the
core idea is that personal freedom – which is but one dimension of
freedom for Hegel – is achieved when the will of agents is
embodied in the objects they individually possess. Property
enables the will to be projected in a fashion which permits it to
be intelligible to the owner and to others – and intelligibility,

186

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

self-understanding in a sphere of public meaning, is a condition of
freedom. When we look at our friends’ bookshelves, we may be
interested in the books, but just as likely we are interested in our
friends in a way that supposes they themselves understand how
their choices may be read by those who recognize the titles. Freedom entails interpretation – which licenses subterfuge. We all
know what’s going on when the novelist portrays the parvenu buying a whole library at auction.
I caricature Hegel’s arguments with scandalous brevity, but
consider the upshot. If we understand private property as an
expression of freedom, and if personal freedom is a distinctive and
universal value, oughtn’t everyone to have some? It is a matter of
difﬁcult textual exegesis to determine whether Hegel accepted this
conclusion. In The Philosophy of Right, at §49, he denies that his
account of private property has any distributional implications,
though in an appended note he is reported as saying that everyone
should have some property and, at §§240–5, he suggests that poverty is a moral affront, depriving citizens of their personal integrity. Whatever the nuances of his published views, he ought to
have stated ﬁrmly that the lack of all property is a personal disaster in a society which recognizes private property as central to
freedom.
Exactly the same charge may be made against Nozick. Whatever
grounds are advanced as foundations for a right to private property are likely to have some implications concerning the distribution of it. The greater the importance private property assumes,
the more necessary it is that some canons of distribution be
acknowledged.
In Nozick’s case, we must guess what the groundings of a value
of private property might be. Presumably property is necessary if
individuals are to live their lives as separate autonomous agents.
This makes sense; without property in a propertied society individuals are driven from pillar to post. One doesn’t need to endorse
all the details of the Hegelian story to understand this. In which
case, it is necessary to work out how much private property, and of
what kind, is necessary for an autonomous life. Ignore the difﬁculties of this task for the moment. My conclusion is formal. If stuff,
things, bits and pieces of physical matter, cannot be treated as
means merely, by anybody, this can only be because they are the

187

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

private property of someone else, because in treating things in this
way we are failing to respect some person’s property rights. Whatever account we give – of how using things can be damaging people
– it will stress the value to people of the things they claim to own.
If ownership is of some such value, some measure of private property should be accorded to everyone. What measure? Who knows?
But whatever the measure that emerges from a philosophical
investigation of the value of property, it will be applied in a patterned theory of justice. If private property is a condition of a free
and truly autonomous life, we should work to make everyone
autonomous. We should make sure they all have enough property
to live a life of value. The pattern that freedom necessitates may
indeed require that freedom (in the speciﬁc respect, say, of being in
command of all of one’s earnings) be compromised – and compromised continually in the fashion of regular taxation – but I can
think of no defence of private property that does not yield this
consequence. To be blunt: if private property is that important,
everybody had better have some and enough of it.
F.A. Hayek
This lesson is worth reiterating against another theory (or nontheory) of social justice – that of F.A. Hayek. Hayek’s published
work is a distinctive amalgam of studies in economics, politics and
public administration. In an age when political philosophy was
proclaimed to have died the death, a seminal work such as The
Constitution of Liberty (1960) had the appearance of an academic
dinosaur lumbering around ﬁelds now devoted to the cultivation
of other interests. Then, spectacularly, Hayek lived long enough to
see his work taken up by powerful and determined politicians, notably Keith Joseph and Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom
in the 1970s and 1980s, as a new orthodoxy to which ‘there is no
alternative’. Dying in 1992, he lived long enough, too, to see some
of the misery and social disintegration caused by his disciples.17
Hayek is a sceptic concerning the value of social or distributive
justice. The term ‘social justice’ is ‘empty and meaningless’, a ‘hollow incantation’; he perceives that the ‘Emperor has no clothes’,
that the ideal of social justice is a mirage.18 One element of his

188

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

scepticism derives from an argument that should carry no weight.
Justice, he insists, is a negative value expressed by conformity to
a system of rules that have the logical form of Nozick’s sideconstraints: ‘Do not. . . .’ Injustice is witnessed only when one
individual intentionally and illegitimately coerces another.19
Suppose a pattern of ownership emerges from voluntary interpersonal transactions of the sort imagined in Nozick’s Wilt Chamberlain example. This new array of holdings cannot be deemed
unjust because it was intended by no one; it is the unintended
(though perhaps anticipated – by clever Wilt) outcome of thousands of independently taken decisions. Wilt is lucky that his
skills elicit such a response. My mother’s skill at dominoes, though
equally distinctive, has earned her little. Expand this example so
that all sorts of free market transactions are included. The pattern
of holdings that results, willy-nilly, from thousands and thousands
of market transactions cannot be deemed unjust because no one
intended their realization, however well-off the winners and however poor the losers. Michael sells his council house, purchased
for £5,000 in Lewisham in 1984 for £300,000 and retires to Spain;
Judy ﬁnds that she cannot keep up the payments on hers and is
forced into repossession. John starts a business and fails, losing
his house in the process. Bridget offers the same services, ﬁve
years on, and ﬁnds an eager market. She’s rich. This is the diet of
awful warnings and splendid examples that feed our gossip and ﬁll
the commercial pages of local newspapers. Good news – bad news.
No one was coerced or ﬁddled. The outcomes are not unjust however uneven the pattern of wealth and income and however discrepant it may be with persons’ skills, efforts or qualities of
character.
We can see the logic of this conclusion, but should reject it
nonetheless since its premise is tendentious. If we were operating
with a concept of justice so clear and uncontentious that the
derivative concept of social justice were an evident solecism,
Hayek’s argument would be decisive. But we aren’t. As things
stand, it’s as though one were to argue that since promises are
transactions between persons and treaties are supposed to be
promises effected between states, no treaties are binding since
states cannot, by deﬁnition, make promises. We don’t disallow the
concepts of social justice and international treaties. We go back to

189

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

the drawing-board and articulate our concepts in a way that
permits further discussion.
One notion behind Hayek’s dismissal of social justice is the
thought that the targets of moral judgements can only be individual persons and their activities. It’s bad luck but not unfair if
one is born with cerebral palsy or a severe learning disability. It is
not a condition of injustice that some (most) persons are mobile
and others not, that some (most) can learn to read and write and
earn their own living and others not. In the absence of a God who
has intentionally portioned these goods unequally, states of affairs
such as these are not subject to moral judgement. They are the
product of misfortune. This point must be conceded. So far as the
origin of these states of affairs are concerned, they are not unjust.
So far as the maintenance of these states are concerned, they
well may be. It’s bad luck that Jim was born with palsy, but this
should not be thought to settle the issue of justice with respect to
his continued immobility or with respect to his inability to cope
with the physical demands of a normal schooling. If practical remedies exist, and nowadays they do, then the question of whether
social provision should be made for them in the name of justice is
open (and will be considered later). Is the same true in respect of
the outcome of market transactions? I don’t see why not. If markets collapse and whole industries go under, large numbers of
people may be unemployed and unable to ﬁnd gainful work through
no fault of their own. Their resultant poverty is not the product of
injustice, but their continuance in a state where they do not have
the resources to fend for themselves may well present a moral issue
to the society in which such structural unemployment has
occurred and it is natural to use the language of justice to frame
the demands of the poor for assistance. Social justice, the sort of
justice that requires the redistribution of goods within a society,
does not have to be understood as the remedy for intended
injustice, as though injustice has to be demonstrated before the
demand for justice has any purchase. The examples I have been
using suggest that the fact of dire need will serve.
Hayek denies this, believing that the concept of need is tainted
by the normativity of the variety of conceptions of human nature
that are employed to specify its content, but now, of course, the
argument has moved on (and we shall review this objection to

190

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

arguments from needs later). He does not deny that all persons
should be guaranteed a minimum level of subsistence represented
as a minimum level of income but insists that this is not a matter of
justice. Often it will be a socially prudent safeguard against the
possibility of serious social unrest.20 At other times it may be a
socially organized charitable response to the embarrassingly inyour-face challenge of widespread indigence. In point of fact,
responses to desperate poverty or conspicuous health needs may be
of these kinds and may be justiﬁed in these ways, but the contingent availability of other reasons for redistributing wealth and
income does not disallow the claims of justice.
The crucial weakness of Hayek’s denial of social justice is
exactly the same as Nozick’s. He must assume the legitimacy of
some starting point from which a pattern of market-based holdings
can emerge. In Nozick’s case we postulated some quasi-Kantian
doctrine of rights deriving from persons’ autonomy as the candidate justiﬁcation most consonant with his moral outlook, and then
insisted that any such doctrine must issue in at least a minimally
patterned theory of justice in holdings: that everyone should possess sufﬁcient property and receive sufﬁcient income to live an
autonomous life. Hayek shows no inclination to follow such an
abstract route. By contrast, but to the same effect, he supposes
along with David Hume that the institutions of property, the rules
and practices which dictate who owns what in a modern capitalist
society have evolved as an efﬁcient solution to the problems of the
allocation of goods. He supposes that the rules governing property
acquisition and exchange must have a functional utility, otherwise
they would have been jettisoned hitherto.
This is a perfectly cogent line of argument. Indeed we noticed
this brand of conservative utilitarianism earlier. But it is important to realize that it yields only a default position. If justice
amounts to the assumption of utility in the rules of the market,
then those rules are open to amendment and change in the name of
justice if utility can be better served by amending them. On this
account, social justice is not distinct from utility, but as a derivative principle it should not be thought to be idle. It may well
provide the sort of bulwark against widespread social experimentation that Hayek insists upon, but equally it may license the
challenge that social justice is violated by extreme disparities of

191

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

wealth and income or the fact of debilitating need. Whatever principle is employed to defend the distribution of income and wealth
prior to the sequence of market transactions must be available for
judgement on the outcome. That the outcome was not anticipated,
that the consequences were not intended, that the resultant pattern was not designed: none of these claims (and we can grant
their truth) are to the point if the upshot is inconsistent with the
principles of justice employed to vindicate the initial set of
holdings.
I said earlier that this discussion of Hayek would amount to
crude surgery. Followers of Hayek will no doubt call it butchery.
So be it. It certainly does no justice to Hayek’s positive defence of
the free market as against regimes of central planning (but one
can deny that the only way of recognizing demands of social justice is by establishing the bureaucracy of the pre-1989 Soviet-style
planned economy or through the acceptance of institutions which
irrevocably lead in that or other totalitarian directions) and it
does not address Hayek’s philosophical criticisms of speciﬁc conceptions of social justice. It does not discuss his conception of the
rule of law (except to insist that the law of property must be justiﬁed in accordance with principles that ﬁnd application in the
moral judgement of states of affairs that issue from the observance
of such laws) and it does not examine his anguished discussion of
constitutional law-making (fuelled by a distrust of the common
people who are at once citizens of a democracy and members of
trades unions). What I claim (to a readership whom, I suppose, can
easily identify my hostility to Hayek’s views) is that social justice
is not a value that can be dumped in the rubbish bin of
philosophical fairy-stories or pseudo-concepts as a consequence
of Hayek’s assaults, but must be carefully articulated and
investigated.
Private property
My conclusion is that, in considering the problem of justice in the
distribution of goods, the ﬁrst step must always be the articulation
of a theory of property. We need to know what principles can be
advanced to legitimate a system of holdings. Thus far we have been

192

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

assuming that what is at stake is private property. This is because,
in following Nozick’s treatment of justice, we have been concerned
with the allocation of property to individuals, with individual
claim rights to property. But as we noticed in Chapter 4, there may
be group rights as well as individual rights, and we are perfectly
familiar with groups or collectives, as well as individuals, claiming
exclusive property rights. There may be family property, university
property, church property, company property, village, city, county
or regional property, the property of the state and, indeed, of
international associations. These may give rise to inclusive property rights, in virtue of which group members claim access, or they
may not. A crofter may put his cow to graze the common land of
the township, but a citizen cannot wander over state property at
will. In addition, there are arguments of principle concerning
which sort of ownership is most apt for which type of good. Are the
means of production, distribution and exchange best owned by
individuals or groups? If groups, which groups – those who work
on or with the means of production, or the state?
Deﬁnitions at this point are hazardous. We can imagine someone
arguing that all property is private – private, that is, to the agency
which claims exclusive rights over the domain, private though the
agency is a collective, private in the sense that the collective
agency asserts rights against other agencies or individuals who are
not members of it. Contrariwise, one may claim that all ownership
is group ownership, since every domain will be regulated by rules
of use and access which are ultimately legislated for by the state.
The sovereign, insists Hobbes, has ‘the whole power of prescribing
the Rules, whereby every man may know what Goods he may enjoy
and what Actions he may doe, without being molested by any of his
fellow Subjects: and this is it men call Propriety’.21
Two hundred years of argument concerning private versus public ownership, capitalism versus socialism or communism, can be
organized around stipulated deﬁnitions of private versus public
property which are deployed in debates over justice. My focus in
this chapter will be on private ownership in the utterly conventional sense of ownership by individual persons or families. I
confess that this decision may seem to beg questions and to preempt contributions from collectivist traditions which emphasize
group membership or interpersonal solidarity as an integral

193

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

element in the identity of all persons. It may be that in the course
of this enquiry we ignore our species being, the fact of our humanity, as we must take Marx to mean,22 or perhaps we fail to recognize
fundamental features of our relatedness to others (our equality or
our fraternity or solidarity as compromised by class antagonism)
in virtue of our standing in respect of the way production of commodities is organized in the societies we inhabit. Oh well – we can’t
ﬁght all our battles on the same terrain. At bottom, I shall assume,
all of us live and die as discrete individual persons: a poor, meagre
truth, but irrefutable. As individuals we require the goods of this
earth to feed, shelter and otherwise sustain us. And so we must, as
individuals, make claims against others for sufﬁcient access to the
bare necessities. We all of us require that the earth sustain us.
Clean air, nourishing food, unpolluted water, clothing, whatever
materials are necessary for warmth and shelter: such goods are all
earthly, all are the product of our natural environment, and each
of us would (or should) claim access to them in circumstances
where they are denied or unavailable. At the point where the food
and the ﬁngers meet the mouth of the starving child, no one can
deny her access. The object of property is centrally physical, a
portion of the natural world.23
There may be a range of schemes which aim to deliver the necessary goods to the individuals who require them. At the extremes we
have respectively, private ownership and collective, but inclusive,
ownership. In the middle, there are a myriad of combinations of
each and we can expect political parties to ﬁght amongst themselves for the optimal division. My intuition is this: in circumstances where the goods of the earth can be so apportioned that no
one may die (or be subject to extreme discomfort whilst others
prosper) as a result of an ill division, any distribution of these
goods which has these dreadful consequences is unjust.
In conclusion, I deem the debate between private and public
property to be peripheral to the issue of personal rights to the
means of subsistence. This debate concerns the means of production and exchange rather than the rights which govern allocation.
Issues concerning which is the optimum system for organizing
production, which is the most efﬁcient means of distribution, are
secondary to questions of who requires which goods in order to
live – and live commodiously, as Hobbes would put it. At bottom,

194

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

individuals, who live and may perish, are the subjects of moral
claims. To suggest that philosophical problems concerning production and exchange are secondary is not to say such problems are
insigniﬁcant, or to hint that the socialist agenda is to be cast aside
following the triumph of the free market. That would be silly. After
all it may emerge that a collective (socialist) system of ownership,
production and exchange is required in order that persons be free
as well as ﬁt for a decent life. But these are questions we shall have
to put aside for the moment. The ﬁrst thing that we should address
is the bottom line my argument has put into the foreground of
discussion: what are our human needs?

Human needs
Suppose we have in place a property system governed by rules of
entitlement and transfer concerning income and wealth. We can
expect, following Hume, that all sorts of curious principles will
ﬁnd a place, given the contingencies of history, as mankind in our
locality have responded to opportunities for ﬁnding mutual advantage and perspicuous general utility.24 This will give us an inventory of who owns which goods. The rules of this game, explicit in
the law, will likely be formulated in terms of rights of the different
varieties charted in Chapter 4. A theory of justice will approach
the detail of any given property system, whatever the story of its
origins, as a standard, a test that the system must pass if it is to be
judged legitimate and granted moral approval. Many such tests
have been proposed, and we can consider only a few here. Arguably
the most familiar, and probably the most contentious amongst
philosophers, is the test of need. Does the property system that we
are appraising meet distinctive human needs? So much social policy is predicated on the satisfaction of needs that one must suppose
that a correct employment of the term is often sufﬁcient to decide
arguments concerning just distribution. In practice, and as with
arguments concerning liberty and human rights, once contending
parties come to agree that such and such a policy meets an evident
need, policy disputes are concluded. But philosophical debates
often begin at the point where political disagreements are settled.
The very prominence of the concept of needs, its obvious appeal as

195

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

an element in the rhetoric of politicians and interest-groups as
well as the claims of individuals, requires that the philosopher
subject it to the closest investigation.
The ﬁrst task which evaluation of needs as a principle of justice
imposes is that of understanding the concept of need. The second
task is that of describing the application of this concept: what are
the needs familiarly adduced? If these tasks can be accomplished,
a third is immediately suggested: is justice in part or in whole a
matter of meeting citizens’ needs?
The requirement that we articulate carefully the concept of
needs derives from an obvious challenge. Remember the standard
objection to Mill’s harm principle: since any activity may be
deemed harmful, the principle has no cutting edge to be employed
in the distinction of legitimate and illegitimate interference. If the
concept of needs were as vague or inchoate as this objection supposes the concept of harm to be, it would be equally impotent in
the determination of which elements of a property system could be
deemed just or unjust. The danger here is that the concept cannot
be ﬁxed with sufﬁcient precision to distinguish clearly claims of
need from claims which derive from wants, desires, preferences,
likings, whims or fancies. Hegel, for example, described the
economic system as a system of needs, where needs amount to
consumer demands and these are recognized to have become
increasingly sophisticated and reﬁned.25 The terminology does no
harm to Hegel’s argument, but given his recognition of the mechanisms by which needs, thus construed, multiply in modern society
(as, for example, people struggle to keep up with the Joneses), justice can hardly be a matter of meeting needs if these needs include
purchasing a car at least as powerful as that of one’s neighbours.
Fortunately the technical apparatus of analytic philosophy
enables us to sharpen the distinction which Hegel deliberately
occludes – that between needs on the one hand and wants, desires,
preferences, whims and fancies on the other. Take desires: the
following argument form is taken to show that desires are
psychological states:
(1) William desires to meet Elton John.
(2) Elton John is Reg Dwight.
(3) Therefore, William desires to meet Reg Dwight.

196

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

The inference is fallacious, moving from true premises to a false
conclusion. Since, in the case where William has never heard of
Reg Dwight he evidently does not desire to meet Reg Dwight, the
construction ‘x desires y’ is in technical parlance intensional.
Contrast:
(4) William met Elton John.
(5) Elton John is Reg Dwight.
(6) Therefore, William met Reg Dwight.
Here the conclusion is evidently true and the argument form valid.
The sentence form, ‘x met y’, is extensional, permitting the substitution of terms denoting the same object, whilst preserving the
truth-value of the sentence.
Now, compare (1) – (3) with:
(7) William needs water.
(8) Water is H2O.
(9) Therefore, William needs H2O.
Here, as with (4) – (6), the conclusion goes through. William does
need H2O whether he realizes this or not. What does this argument
show?26
First, let me mention a caveat to the terms in which this argument is generally presented. Standardly, needs are contrasted with
wants, not, as I have presented matters, with desires. This is
because I feel that if the crux of the argument depends on a technicality, we had better get it absolutely right. I think there is a use
of ‘want’ (noun) and ‘want’ (verb) which exhibits the same extensional character as ‘needs’. ‘War on Want’ names a charity which is
not directed to the satisfaction of appetitive states of mind. ‘You
want a haircut’, can be prescriptive or descriptive; if the former, it
is not false because you disavow it. The ambiguity over ‘want’
(extensional) and ‘want’ (intensional) feeds many a rhetorical
ﬂourish in the battle between teenagers and their parents. As correctives of the work of other philosophers go, this is a minor cavil.
I console myself against the charge that this is mere linguistic
pedantry with the thought that if you make the complaint you
understand the drift of the arguments I qualify.

197

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

We may conclude that needs are not a particularly strong or
pressing form of desire, at one end of a continuum of psychological
states, with fancies, say, at the other. To say that one needs something is not to ascribe a psychological state to him at all. One is
tempted to say, except that the terms are slippery, that needs are
objective, desires subjective. That one desires something is a fact
about one’s state of mind. That one needs something does not
depend (always) on one’s mental state, more likely on the state of
one’s health. Thus doctors can tell you what you need (by way of
medicine), but they are not authoritative on what you desire. To
shift the target of opprobrium, you may desire Viagara, but the
doctors will not prescribe it on demand unless they judge you
need it.
If these arguments have force, we have countered the charge that
needs are indistinguishable from desires at the point where arguments from justice get a purchase. There is still plenty of work to
be done. In particular, we need to argue why needs give rise to
claims in a way that desires evidently do not. But this task is not
compromised by the thought that needs are a species of desires. We
need to look at the world, at the condition of humanity and its
particular specimens, to judge whether needs are met or ignored.
This is not a matter of whether or not desires are satisﬁed. The
poor child needs the medicine though he doesn’t want to take
it. That this thought makes sense establishes the conceptual
distinction we desire.
A second challenge to the conceptual integrity of claims of need
arises from the thought that all needs are instrumental. If x needs
y, we can always ask: what for? If so, the value of answering the
need is parasitic on the value of the purpose or goal which is furthered by meeting the need. If so, meeting needs has no value
independently of achieving the speciﬁed goals. If so, we can dispense with talk of the value of meeting needs and concentrate on
the achievement of valuable goals.27
There can be no doubt that many judgements truly attesting
speciﬁc needs are instrumental in the manner suggested. ‘I need
change for the parking meter. Do you have two 50p pieces for a
pound?’, one may be asked in the street. If someone says she needs
two 50p pieces, I guess it is always appropriate (if not tactful or
diplomatic) to ask: What for? Such a request always carries the

198

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

implication of ellipsis which the question ‘What for?’ addresses
directly. In another range of cases such a question would seem
plain silly. The doctor says this casualty needs morphine, the
social worker says these parents need a holiday, the aid worker says
this village needs a well. In such cases we expect any intelligent
person to be able to read off from the use of the word ‘need’,
exactly what exigency is being addressed. We can dub needs absolute in cases where their citation does not leave open the question
of what purpose will be served by meeting the need.
This shouldn’t be taken as claiming that there is no answer in
cases of absolute need when the question: What for? is inappropriately put. There will be an answer and the precise mode in which
need is met may give it. The morphine will kill the extreme pain;
the holiday will relieve the parents from the stress of looking after
the handicapped child; the well will spare the village women a
round trip of ten miles per day. David Wiggins argues that these
answers or something like them are explicit or preﬁgured in the
statement of need. There is no question of an ellipsis in such
judgements. ‘One does not have to supply what is already there.’28
If the sceptic presses hard, asking: What is already there? a
schematic answer is at hand, which the questioner, had he truly
understood this concept of need, could have worked out for himself. It is a judgement that if the need is not met the agent will be
harmed in some serious fashion, she will suffer, some crucial interest will be set back, some minimal level of human ﬂourishing will
not be attained. The full story has not been told, but what is
explicit in any judgement of absolute need of this sort is that some
such story is tellable. The complete analysis of a judgement of
absolute need now runs as follows:
I need [absolutely] to have x
if and only if
I need [instrumentally] to have x if I am to avoid being harmed
if and only if
It is necessary, things being what they actually are, that if I
avoid being harmed then I have x. 29
Now we can see why a principle of need is in the same boat as
a harm principle. Its employment requires some conception of

199

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

the good life for human beings which a condition of need or
harm directly frustrates. But this is not a weakness of the concept in advance of such a conception being elaborated. It is only
a weakness if we have good reason to believe that such an
account could not be given or, if it could be given, the conception of harm were too broad to serve the purposes of articulating
a theory of justice, if, for example, one thought a person harmed
were they to fail to get whatever they desire. But one has no
reason to believe either of these things absent a strong argument
for them.
Having distinguished instrumental and absolute needs, we have
opened up a conceptual space which permits other questions to
be asked. Needs vary in their gravity and their urgency. Fred’s
need for a heart bypass operation is more grave than Sylvia’s
need to have her broken leg splinted and plastered, but Fred’s need
can wait, being less urgent. A need may be judged basic if a
person cannot go unharmed unless it is met, given fundamental
and unalterable facts about the world and the typical human
constitution.30
There are good reasons for believing that the concept of needs
and their satisfaction does not exhaust the concept of human wellbeing31 or human ﬂourishing. We can perfectly well imagine a
community of scholars trading off some years of their lives in
order to refurbish a library. We can understand the scientist who is
so ambitious to advance knowledge that he performs a risky
experiment on himself. Parents may buy a computer or hi-ﬁ for a
handicapped child rather than a wheelchair if they judge that that
is what he most wants. Nonetheless, in the particular context of
justice, where what is at issue is the distribution within a society
of generally transferable goods and services, it is proposed that
the principal, i.e. governmental, agencies of distribution should
pay direct attention to the issue of how far basic needs are met.
Here, what has been called the Principle of Precedence – that
the needs of a population take priority over their preferences or
anyone else’s – ﬁnds its home.32 No distribution can be just if it
fails to meet the basic needs of citizens, if some minimum standards are not met in respect of the provision of goods and
services.
Basic needs do not represent a fundamental value. The case for

200

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

attending to them rests on whatever value attaches to the human
well-being, human ﬂourishing or distinctive human agency for
which their satisfaction is deemed a necessary condition. These
deeper values may be entrenched in utilitarian, perfectionist or
Kantian normative ethics. Indeed, it is hard to think of any system
of ethics, which, when applied to the responsibilities of government for meeting the requirements of justice, does not demand the
satisfaction of human needs.
The concept of human needs has been cleared of the charge of
being ill-formed. But is it operational? It rests on a deeper foundation, in an account of human good; it makes a charge on governments in the name of justice. But can the charge be made good in
respect of speciﬁc policies? Between the concept of need as an
element of justice and the speciﬁc policies required if needs are to
be met is the open ground wherein the determination of needs
must be ﬁxed. What needs must be recognized and catered for?
Lurking in the background here are the linked threats of
relativism and needs-inﬂation.
Talk of basic human needs suggests that we might draw up a
list of goods which anyone needs if they are to ﬂourish as
humans or achieve some minimum standard of well-being. First,
they need the wherewithal of survival; second they need to be
able to command whatever resources are necessary if they are to
live freely under their own direction, under some realistic plan
of their own devising or in some social role that they endorse.
The very poor, driven from pillar to post in the effort to achieve
the shortest-term goals of immediate nourishment and shelter, do
not live well during the period they survive. Yet we all know that
in different societies folk are well-used to different levels of life
expectancy or infant mortality, more or less vulnerable to
endemic disease. Even in the comfortable West, indicators of
longevity and good health reveal marked differences between
social classes. There are even signiﬁcant differences between
those at different levels in the hierarchy in the British civil service. Do all of these differences mark differences in the degree to
which basic needs are met? We can accept that a condition of
homelessness is a drastic limitation on the freedom of those who
suffer it, that those who are ‘born to fail’ have their life choices
severely curtailed, but how much in the way of resources does

201

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

one need to command before one is judged to live a life of minimum freedom? The answer to this question, too, will seem to
differ massively between different societies. Freedom, for citizens
of the UK, may require sufﬁcient educational accomplishment
for them to approach the job market with conﬁdence that they
will not be forced to accept what they regard as the most
demeaning and exploitative employment. This thought, hence
this need, may make little sense to members of traditional, agricultural, societies for whom work is a means of self-sufﬁcient
family survival rather than the exploration of a range of individual capacities.
If the baseline of human need is dictated by the objective conditions of the minimum standard of living of human beings who live
contentedly in a manner as commodious as their neighbours, it is
likely to be ﬁxed at a level which is completely unacceptable to the
worst off in better-off societies – as well as to observers of their
plight. If it is a necessary condition of sociability that one be able
to discuss the marriage prospects of a TV soap-opera character
with one’s neighbours, one had better have a television. Less controversially, if citizens in Western democracies need to have some
access to the news media if they are to act as well-informed participators in a democratic decision-making process (and if denial of
this political standing is agreed to be deeply demeaning and disrespectful) they had better be able to purchase TVs, radios and
newspapers or have access to libraries.
The drift of arguments like these is easy to follow. If we are not
careful we shall be forced into a position of accepting that people
in Glasgow need television sets, whereas tribesmen in New Guinea
do not need antibiotics. We would not be worried if opinion surveys revealed that these very different people do and do not desire
such things, but we should be worried by arguments which yield
such a pattern of obviously relative needs.
The argument thus far should not be thought to imply that
philosophers have avoided the embarassingly empirical task of
describing basic needs.33 David Braybrooke lists the following as
candidate matters of need, distinguishing a ﬁrst part concerned
with physical functioning and a second part that concerns
functioning as a social being:

202

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Part 1 includes:
1
2
3
4
5
6

The need to have a life-supporting relation to the environment.
The need for food and water.
The need to excrete.
The need for exercise.
The need for periodic rest, including sleep.
The need (beyond what is covered under the preceding needs)
for whatever is indispensable to preserving the body intact in
important respects.

Part 2 continues:
7
8
9
10
11

The need for companionship.
The need for education.
The need for social acceptance and recognition.
The need for sexual activity.
The need to be free from harassment, including not being
continually frightened.
12 The need for recreation.
This list, from a philosopher, is heroic. Braybrooke does not pretend that the list should be regarded as complete. To do so, we
should have to claim that there is nothing more that we have to
learn about what is necessary for human beings to live well. There
is enough precision in the list for it to be clear why provision to
meet the needs speciﬁed will have to be different from society to
society. Take the need for education. As has been indicated
already, the nature of the skills which need to be inculcated and the
level of proﬁciency required will vary depending upon the demands
of the society in which adults are required to take their place.
Relativities of this sort look to be a real problem if the context
of justice is international and if the question of resource allocation is posed across frontiers. Is it self-indulgent for Western
nations to spend so much money on secondary and higher education whilst the basic health needs of those who live in hovels in
Calcutta go unmet? Questions of this sort cannot be avoided.34 It
would be a real mistake, though, to conclude that the philosophical and practical difﬁculties of detailing standards of
international justice mean that the concept of needs has no place
in addressing them. The opposite, in fact, is true: it is because the
203

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

appeal of universal need satisfaction is so strong that these
questions exhibit such difﬁculty and urgency.
One feature of the debate about international justice which
gives it the appearance of intractability is the absence of any
agency to adjudicate in the case of conﬂict. Within a democratic
state, there will be a forum for expressing and resolving conﬂicts
concerning provision for needs – the political process. We can
observe (we don’t need to imagine) individuals making claims of
need whenever resource allocations concerning health, education
and social security payments are publicly discussed. What is controversial in many policy proposals is not the philosophical question of whether the appeal to need is a claim of justice, but the
quasi-philosophical question of whether, say, publicly funded nursery education meets a real need or, if one agrees that it does, what
is the measure of gravity or urgency involved, what comparitive
judgements should be reviewed. We observe endemic dispute here
and it is evident that the disputes often have their origin in conﬂicting assessment of needs. None of this should lead us to believe
that the concept of need is unﬁtted to constitute a standard of just
provision since the relativities involved disable impartial assessment. We can tinker with the list, we can debate the modalities of
assessment as we work out what the service of a speciﬁc need
warrants by way of provision, and ﬁnally, we can leave ﬁne-grain
decision-making in respect of policy proposals to the political
process.
Does this establish that provision for needs is a requirement of
justice? This last question links a Humean conception of justice as
the principles which govern the allocation of resources within a
society to a normative ethics which determines which principles
are appropriate. Needs, on this account, have an intermediate status. At bottom will be competing accounts of the good, what it is
for human lives to go well. Any such account will yield a set of
necessary conditions which amount to statements of need. The
task of working out all of the details is immense, but since it is a
matter of working out what justice requires, the task is
unavoidable.
To review our progress so far: we must suppose that a wellordered society has in place a set of rules which settle conﬂicts
amongst competing claimants to goods. The details of these rules

204

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

will likely ﬁll shelves of texts in a law library. I think we can fairly
suppose in advance of detailed criticism that these rules promote
utility, perhaps in the detail of their operation, but most likely
through their general function of serving expectations and settling disputes. Hume believed that such an existent system
amounted to a system of justice, but we have seen that unless the
distribution of resources meets the needs of those subject to it,
this verdict is premature. Consideration of needs at this point will
require transfers from those whose property exceeds what they
need towards those who are needy.
There are many different ways in which such transfers may be
effected. Those with goods in excess of their needs may recognize a
duty of care or exhibit their benevolent nature by charitable donations. The resulting transfers will be unsystematic and haphazard
but it is perfectly possible to imagine needs being met in this fashion in a very small society. And even in very large (and rich) modern societies it is likely that a substantial proportion of personal
needs will be met in this way, not least within families. We are all
used to reading that some charity has funded equipment in hospitals, that parents and neighbours have supported the local
school, that volunteers are providing soup kitchens for the indigent. More important, however, are transfers which are organized
by the state. Generally these will involve taxation of earnings or
sales, less often wealth; governments exact their imposts in ways
that are minimally perspicuous. But conﬁscation and redistribution of capital assets may be effected to the same purpose,
though the history of such efforts in the twentieth century has
been conspicuously inglorious. Whereas individual benefactors
respond to the needs of fellow citizens by ostentatious public benefactions, modern democratic governments meet needs by stealth,
believing, often truly, that there are fewer voting gainers than
losers.
Despite their objective condition, people do not like to be identiﬁed as needy, as worthy recipients of the charity or the ultimately coercive redistribution of their fellow citizens’ assets, unless
these are ill-gotten gains. Nozick’s claim that taxation is forced
labour, the philosophical shadow of a cocktail-bar grudge, may as
likely prompt guilt and shame on the part of recipients as resentment amongst the providers. The effective operation of the welfare

205

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

state in Britain needs welfare rights ofﬁcials to prod people into
making their legitimate claims. And still, take-up levels are well
below the computations of statisticians employed to determine the
maximum possible costs of the exercise in redistribution. Talk of
‘the needy’ carries echoes of Lady Bountiful. Those who identify
and respond to unmet needs may ﬁnd that their rhetoric meets the
resistance of the poor objects of their attention. Perhaps it is
better to speak of rights rather than duties and to ground the
rights of the needy in the language of equality. For many the
language of equality carries a dignity which is threatened by talk
of needs.

Equality of what?
It is a familiar thought that justice in distribution is at least in
part, or in some respects, a matter of equality. It may be that one
who advances such a claim has some speciﬁc egalitarian system in
mind as constituting the heart of justice, most simply perhaps the
condition that a system of just property distribution requires that
everyone get equal shares. If property were a homogenous good,
like a cake, then everyone should get an equal slice. But equality
may be more vaguely construed. It may amount to the requirement
that the principles of justice will not be acceptable unless they
grant equal consideration in some sense to all who are subject to
them. Otherwise, and one does not need to be a contractarian to
see the force of this objection, those who are not granted equal
consideration have strong prima facie grounds for complaint.
Amartya Sen has argued that:
‘a characteristic of virtually all the approaches to the ethics of
social arrangements that have stood the test of time is to want
equality of something – something that has an important place
in the particular theory. Not only do income egalitarians . . .
demand equal incomes, and welfare egalitarians ask for equal
welfare levels, but also classical utilitarians insist on equal
weights on the utilities of all, and pure libertarians demand
equality with respect to an entire class of rights and liberties.
They are all ‘egalitarians’ in some essential way . . . 35

206

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

This is a helpful way of putting matters, not least since it opens
up the right questions. Instead of debating the pros and cons of
egalitarianism versus anti-egalitarianism, we can consider in
sequence the forms of equality that have been deemed constitutive
of justice. We can ask, in the words of Sen’s famous paper, ‘Equality of What?’.36 Once the different accounts have been clariﬁed, we
can return to the issue of whether principles of equality meet, or
are properly considered as supplementary to, considerations
arising from needs.
The most straightforward answer to Sen’s question is equality of
goods or resources. Rawls’s account of justice incorporates a version of this. I quote it now in its most general form: ‘All social
values – liberty and opportunity, income and wealth and the bases
of self-respect – are to be distributed equally unless an unequal
distribution of any, or all, of these values is to everyone’s
advantage.’37
Rawls’s Difference Principle, specifying that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are reasonably
expected to be to everyone’s advantage, is ‘strongly egalitarian in
the sense that unless there is a distribution that makes [everyone]
better off . . . an equal distribution is to be preferred’.38 The goods to
be distributed in accordance with the principle are the social primary goods – things that every rational man is presumed to want,
being all-purpose means whatever one’s plan of life and susceptible to social distribution. Income and wealth are the primary
goods Rawls has in mind at this point. Equality and inequality
(and hence justice in distribution) concern the allocation of
economic resources.
This is a natural suggestion, since economic goods are just the
sort of goods that government can distribute through effecting
transfers. The modality in which equality is sought – income and
wealth – is peculiarly apt for the purposes of governments which
recognize the demands of justice. If the difference principle were
acceptable, its policy implications would be clear. Progressive taxation, particularly of incomes, together with a negative income
tax, is an obvious means of effecting redistribution towards equality. The point at which redistribution would be limited would be
that at which transfers from rich to poor reduced the goods available to the poor. This would be the case if, for example, taxation

207

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

were a sufﬁcient disincentive to productive activity that entrepreneurs ceased or restricted their production or relocated their
economic activity (and their capacity to provide work) to another
tax jurisdiction.
The weakness of this proposal lies in its insensitivity to claims
which arise on the basis of need. We can easily imagine a society
where wealth and income is divided equally. We can imagine all
members of such a society moving towards a condition of inequality if those who are worst off in the new dispensation are better off
than they were under equality. But justice so construed ignores
marked differences in the personal characteristics of members of
this society. As Sen points out,
these are important for assessing inequality. For example, equal
incomes can still leave much inequality in our ability to do what
we would value doing. A disabled person cannot function in the
way an able-bodied person can, even if both have exactly the
same income.39
Of course this criticism would have no purchase if we had no
concern for inequalities in ‘our ability to do what we would value
doing’, or if, as in the particular case of the person with special
needs, we did not think that justice was at least, in part, a matter
of meeting these needs. But we should notice that ideals of equality in the distribution of economic goods would be a real puzzle
unless we thought that some underlying principles motivated our
concern with such inequality. We accept that individuals are
unequal in respect of their height, weight and beauty without
identifying an injustice. Why should differences in income or size
of house cause us to register concern? We must think that such
inequalities violate some principle of equal respect or fail to recognize equal claims on the product of social co-operation. In which
case, we shall have to work out whether these underlying principles demand an inequality of resources as the just response to
claims of need.
Equality of goods may be thought of as equality of input. The
objection concerning special needs may be read as drawing attention to inequalities of output – the goods which are allocated do
not serve uniformly to produce equal levels of well-being, given the

208

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

very great disparity in the conditions in which individuals ﬁnd
themselves. Perhaps we should concentrate on output, on the wellbeing of those in the circumstances of justice. This suggests that
we pursue equal utility, directing our attention to the happiness or
desire-satisfaction of those in receipt of goods. At this point, as we
have already noticed, the utilitarian will press a claim.
Utilitarian arguments are no more cogent than the facts permit.
Diminishing marginal utility suggests that movements away from
equality which have both winners and losers beneﬁt the utilitygainers by a lesser amount than the disutility suffered by the
losers. But this supposes that both winners and losers are equally
efﬁcient transformers of the good to be distributed. In cases of
special needs, physical or mental disability, there may be a threshold of resource provision below which allocations do little good. If
Harry’s problem is mobility, nothing less than an electric wheelchair will enable him to get to the shops. Travel vouchers or discounted fares will not assist him, supposing that even if he could
sell these concessions he would not have enough money to purchase the wheelchair. Sally, by contrast would get enormous
pleasure from a sports car. It is all too easy to imagine social circumstances in which total utility is increased by allocating the
sports car to Sally at the cost of inefﬁcient allocations to Harry
and many others like him. In such circumstances, as Sen points out,
The cripple would then be doubly worse off: both since he gets
less utility from the same level of income, and since he will also
get less income. Utilitarianism must lead to this thanks to its
single-minded concern with maximising the utility sum.40
This example is important because it reinforces the lesson
drawn from considering goods or resources as the metric of equality. Human diversity makes a difference. One might have thought
that justice, being a central province of government, must always
be a matter of rough justice, that successful policies must abstract
from the speciﬁcities of differences in the condition and circumstances of individuals. On the contrary, the speciﬁc circumstances
in which groups of people ﬁnd themselves may evince the sort of
special need which it is precisely the task of government policies
directed towards the promotion of justice to redress.

209

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

In the example just discussed, the crucial feature is the manner
in which the cripple and the speedster (Sen’s term is ‘pleasurewizard’) are able to transform the input of goods into the output of
utility, where utility denotes some positive mental state of the persons affected. Such facts are well-known. Young children are notably efﬁcient transformers of toys into utility. One doesn’t (or
didn’t) need to spend much to make them happy. Diversities in
respect of the contribution of goods to individual happiness work
in another fashion to undermine varieties of utilitarianism which
count happiness or desire-satisfaction as the good to be maximized. Societies as we encounter them are deeply riven by inequalities deriving from group membership. Societies apportion goods
in line with ethnic, religious, sex and gender role, caste and class
differences which, contingently, have established a social hierarchy. Objectively, the circumstances of the unfortunates at the
bottom of a particular pile may be dire, but subjectively, they
may be cheerful enough with their lot. Perhaps they believe one
well-known story:
The rich man in his castle,
The poor man at his gate,
God made them, high or lowly
And ordered their estate.41
Many of the lowly have sung along with their superiors, sensibly
coming to terms with inequalities they can do little about in a stoic
fashion which leaves them as happy as anyone in the castle. They
may be poorly housed, ill-fed, suffer from poor health and come to
an early death, but in point of utility their lives may go no worse.42
Despite their lack of gripes and grumbles, one may fairly describe
their condition as unjust if basic needs go unmet.
The lesson of Sen’s review of equality as a metric of goods on
the one hand and utility on the other is that we should focus on
equality of something else. His positive recommendation is that we
concentrate on equality with respect to persons’ capabilities to
achieve functionings, what he calls, in ‘Equality of What?’, ‘basic
capability equality’. A human functioning is a state of a person or
an activity, something a person may do. So good health is a functioning as is the taking of exercise. Functionings such as these are

210

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

arguably necessary for human ﬂourishing, yet we can understand
someone who risks or foregoes them in the service of some other
ideal. I risk my health in order to make the scientiﬁc discovery, I
stop taking exercise until I have ﬁnished writing the book. Given
these possibilities we can see how what is valuable is the capability
to maintain my health or take regular exercise should I choose to
do so.
Capabilities are distinct from the primary goods that serve them
in so far as equality of primary goods will not ensure equality in
respect of capability. They are distinct from utilities in that social
conditions may produce equality of happiness and yet some of the
happy people may be severely restricted in respect of important
functionings. Of course there are lots of human functionings that
are of little or no theoretical interest. To adapt an example of
Sen’s, if the Blanco washing powder company goes bust, I cannot
use the product any more nor am I free to select it from the range
of equally good alternatives.43 Technically, my functioning is
impaired, my capability reduced. Other functionings, by contrast,
are vital, and these will be the functionings identiﬁed less
technically as human needs.
If we are concerned primarily with policies which promote
equality with respect to persons’ capability to function in ways
necessary for them to have a decent life in the society they inhabit,
we shall have given ourselves a hard task in respect of identifying
speciﬁc policy objectives. This will require a delicate mixture of
philosophy, economics and sociology which cannot, in principle,
be reduced to a democratic practice of counting preferences, since
needs are in part objective and, as we have seen, preferences can be
seriously and systematically distorted. Next we shall need to
engage the political task of organizing a society in such a way as to
effect the transfers necessary to meet the needs that have been
identiﬁed. The social democratic societies of Western Europe have
all given lip-service to this ideal of equality in respect of meeting
needs, but the attainment of it is beginning to have the air of an
intractable practical problem. When sociologists (or, more likely
social workers) point out the level of unmet needs in a variety of
different policy contexts, e.g. health, education, housing, provision
for the elderly, and urge a greater measure of redistribution of
resources, politicians, increasingly of all mainstream parties,

211

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

respond that meeting these needs ﬁrst requires further economic
growth, that the strategic political priority must be the effectively
painless process of raising more resources, achieving a greater
social fund of income and proﬁt which can be taxed without
creating disincentive effects.
This may have the appearance of a strategic problem particular
to the political representatives who take policy decisions in fear of
upsetting the comfortable majority, but there is reason to think the
practical difﬁculties have deeper origins. The claims of justice as I
have been developing them require that basic human needs impose
duties of service on the part of those who possess the resources to
meet them. Whilst there is plenty of evidence that citizens of the
comfortable West are severely discomﬁted by the obtrusive, conspicuous needs of, say, fellow citizens who are reduced to living in
cardboard boxes, queueing at soup kitchens or begging in the
street, the task of serving these needs is bestowed on politicians
who guarantee that social amelioration will not be too costly. This
may be a realistic recognition of a severe tension within the practical reason of citizens, a tension between their acceptance of
claims of need on the one hand and their belief, on the other hand,
that needs can only be met by an economic system that is powered
by the strong incentives of self-interest that are integral to
capitalism.44
The argument has been skimpy, but assume we have established
as a minimum requirement of justice, that citizens’ basic needs,
their capability to achieve a minimum set of vital functionings, be
met in equal measure. Suppose, too, that there is agreement on the
nature of these needs and the policies that serve them. Suppose
further that the needs are generously identiﬁed. People not only
live, but have the opportunity to live commodiously. Is that enough
equality? Should we care, if all have the opportunity to live
decently, that some have the capability to live much better lives
than others in respect of their having available more resources,
more income and wealth?
If one were speaking here of a political ideal which might be
recommended as a personal project, the pursuit of equality beyond
that of meeting needs would be ludicrously utopian. There is
enough work for a lifetime in pursuing the more modest aim, even
in the more generous of liberal democracies. But does justice

212

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

require a greater equality than this? Should we be concerned
about or morally indifferent to inequalities of income and wealth
if the worst off cannot be described as needy?
It is clear that inequality can be an instrumental evil. Rousseau
insisted that ‘the social state is advantageous to men only when all
have something and none too much’.45 How much is too much? We
must suppose it is represented by such a degree of inequality as
will enable the better off to suborn the ideal of equal political
power, by purchasing the allegiance of others. Nowadays one
might identify such harmful inequalities in the workings of a
property system which enables power seekers to buy newspapers or
television stations which they use unashamedly to advance their
own political causes. Deeper, and more insidious, is the way in
which inequalities of wealth are transformed into social differences and fossilized by processes of social stratiﬁcation whenever
the laws of property permit inequalities to be transmitted from one
generation to another. No human characteristic is more faithfully
transmitted from one generation to the next than earning power.
The laws of inheritance are more effective than the laws of
evolution in transmitting the holding of wealth to successor
generations.
We can imagine a society in which there is no inherited wealth.
Members are permitted to acquire as much as they can by way of
effort and the use of their talents. But on death, all assets are
pooled into a social fund and redistributed equally to all members
of society. My guess is that such a measure of involuntary potlach
would dissolve the rigid class formations which disﬁgure even the
most settled social democracies. This is not meant as a practical
proposal, nor even as a recommendation concerning the principles
of justice. Rather, if this exercise in utopian guesswork is plausible, it should cause us measure the degree to which inequalities in
wealth holdings freeze into other inequalities. They inhibit widespread social mobility by limiting expectations. Systems of education serve to reproduce rather than reduce class divisions. Arrogance and social blindness, deference or strategic impertinence
occupy the moral space which should be inhabited by respect and
mutual recognition. Our experience of societies which exhibit
inequalities of wealth and income teaches us that inequality does
great psychological damage. This is the lesson successively, of

213

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Rousseau, Hegel and Marx: social stratiﬁcations, of rich and poor,
masters and slaves, capitalists and workers, universally distort the
self-perceptions of all those located within them.
If differences of income and wealth were merely a matter of
individuals having access to a lesser or wider basket of commodities – so that you buy a poster, I buy a print and John Paul Getty
buys a Botticelli – I suspect little harm is done. Clichés may
express truisms: no one seriously believes that money buys happiness. Although all of us would welcome being better off, those
with seats in the front stalls of the opera are unlikely to be
enjoying themselves much more than the scruffs in the third circle. Given an adequate social baseline, inequalities in primary
goods take on an obvious ethical signiﬁcance only at the point
where they are transformed into inequalities of something
else, of political power, social prestige or opportunities for
advancement. Unfortunately, societies have managed to organize
themselves in such a way that inequalities in primary goods are
transformed and magniﬁed into more damaging inequalities. This
is the great lesson of Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origins of
Inequality.
I can’t think of an argument to establish this conclusion beyond
an appeal to the facts of history and sociology and I can’t present
my idiosyncratic versions of these here. We are left with one clear
philosophical question: Assume no one is needy and that there are
no social mechanisms in place which might transform inequalities
in the holdings of primary goods into other more entrenched or
iniquitous inequalities, is equality of primary goods in any sense a
requirement of justice? I have suggested that inequality might do
little harm, but the absence of harm does not preclude injustice.
We might laugh at the gross ﬂaunting of wealth in popular magazines devoted to the adulation of celebrity and even be grateful
that the photographers are not queuing up outside our doors. Still,
the gross disparities of wealth which are paraded before us daily
may still attest a measure of injustice. To investigate this question,
I shall focus on the work of John Rawls.

214

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

John Rawls’s theory of justice
First, a diversion on Rawls’s work and its place in this study. It is
nearly thirty years since Rawls published A Theory of Justice. It
has been the subject of intense investigation, stimulating fulllength critical studies and papers galore. I remember the sense of
momentous academic achievement which accompanied its publication and the excitement of buying the heavy, black-covered,
hardback edition in 1972. And I remember the pleasure of reading
it from cover to cover. It advances a distinctive thesis, but, like all
great works of philosophy, it is a treasure-house. And the treasures
have been augmented by a succession of later papers and the publication of Political Liberalism in 1993.46 I doubt there is any topic
to be broached in this introduction which could not have been
tackled by way of a discussion of Rawls. Against this background
of Rawls’s eminence, it may seem odd that, so far, he has been a
minor character in this book. I shall try to make amends, but it is
as well to note in advance that I shall be able to discuss only a
small portion of his work. Even this task is complicated because
Rawls’s thinking is distinctively systematic. One can’t ﬁllet out
arguments whilst paying no heed to the overall structure of the
theory. The reader is commended to study all of it.
Justice as fairness
The scope of Rawls’s theory of justice is almost Platonic. For
Rawls, justice is not distributive justice, the narrow matter of who
is entitled to what in the way of property. It is the virtue of a wellordered state and comprises all aspects of its ethical well-being.47
States are natural associations. For the most part, individuals just
ﬁnd themselves in one as members, and ﬁnd that the mode of governance of the state has a major inﬂuence on their prospects for a
decent life. The basic structure of a society (Rawls’s term for the
major social institutions) assigns rights and duties to citizens, as
well as specifying how the advantages that accrue from social
co-operation should be allocated.
A theory of justice is required for familiar Humean reasons.
Persons are supposed to inhabit a world of moderate scarcity, such

215

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

a degree of scarcity as ensures conﬂicting claims on the pool of
resources. If there were abundance, justice would be unnecessary;
if there were a desperate shortage, schemes of social co-operation
would break down. The theory of justice will consist of principles
which regulate the competing claims. What is distinctive about
Rawls’s theory of justice is the form of argument employed to
derive it. This is a hypothetical contract argument.
The classical social contract arguments, as used by Hobbes,
Locke, Rousseau and Kant were used for several different purposes: to justify the claims to authority of the state, to determine
the limits of the state’s claims to authority and to vindicate rebellion where those limits are overstepped, to determine the principles which must be respected by the institutions of the state if its
constitution is to be legitimate and the content of legislation
valid. These are questions we shall be examining in the next chapter. The social contract argument had two forms: ﬁrst, actual
contracts, covenants or universal consent were described or
conjectured as the basis for real obligations. Obviously, such
arguments are only as good as their premisses. If no actual contracts can be reported or if modern citizens could not be supposed
to be party to them, no obligations follow.
The hypothetical contract argument is an animal of a different
stripe. As Dworkin famously observes, ‘a hypothetical contract is
not simply a pale form of an actual contract; it is not a contract at
all’.48 Whereas an actual contract argument cites a speciﬁc occasion or a particular activity as the basis of an obligation: ‘You
signed on the dotted line, so you are obliged to pay me the money’,
in a hypothetical contract argument, there is no contract to which
one may appeal. An argument is employed which sets matters up as
if those who are required to accept its conclusion were party to a
contract or agreement. It is a matter of great controversy whether
or not the classical authors I mentioned above are using actual or
hypothetical contract arguments or both, mixing them together in
a promiscuous and confusing fashion.
In its classical form a hypothetical contract argument works as
follows: Everyone wants certain goods, notably self-preservation,
(and/or pursues certain values e.g. liberty). In a state of nature, i.e.
in circumstances where there is no government, these goods are
threatened (and/or these values thwarted). The state, and only the

216

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

state, will protect these goods (and/or promote these values).
Therefore, those who seek these goods and pursue these values
(generally, everyone) have good reason to accept the authority of
the state. We can portray this conclusion as a contract, an agreement. It is as though everyone has agreed to accept a sovereign
authority. They haven’t, of course, as a matter of fact. Contract
theory is thus a deliver-the-goods theory. It asks people to deduce
the properties of just such an institution as is necessary to promote the good, by asking them to consider what life would be like
without it – in a state of nature – and how this condition could be
remedied.
Why invoke the non-existent contract? Why represent people as
behaving in a way in which they have not, in fact, behaved? Plainly
this is an argumentative device, a strategem of practical reason,
but what use does this device serve, what point does it signify? In
the classical theorists, the argument form serves to remind us that
we are modelling the deliberations of everyone in pursuit of a
conclusion that we can represent everyone as accepting. We model
‘agreement’ in the minimal sense of congruence of reasoning –
everyone has the same (however speciﬁed) goals and everyone can
see the means necessary to achieve them. We portray this congruence as ‘agreement’ in the sense of concert, everyone acting
together, assuming the same obligations. There is a second sense in
which the contract model is apt. The problems that we identify
in the state of nature are problems that we create for each other. In
seeking to protect our lives, we threaten or pre-emptively strike at
everyone else, each regarding the others as competitors or foes.
In order to gain the security which the behaviour of all of us tends
to undermine, we have to give up something, generally the right to
govern ourselves or the right to punish those who violate our
rights. We give in order to get; we trade off our independence for
our security. This may be represented as a contract with each other
or as a contract with a government. The contract device calls
attention to this familiar strategy for procuring mutual advantage.
The terms of our contract state that you are to get the money as
soon as I get the coal. Of course it would be better for you to get the
money without delivering the coal, as it would be better for me to
get the coal without paying the money, but since these alternatives
are not available, we contract with each other, giving in order to get.

217

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Rawls’s social contract theory differs from that of his celebrated
predecessors in that his prime concern is not to spell out the
conditions under which a government should be judged to be
legitimate, although he does have something to say about these
questions.49 His major interest is to spell out the rights and duties
of citizens and the just allocation of the beneﬁts and burdens of
citizenship. But the same question that we put to the classical
theorists can be put to Rawls. No doubt if we had contracted with
each other or with the government to assume a given set of rights
and duties and to apportion goods and services in accordance with
speciﬁc principles we would be obliged to respect the terms of our
agreement. But we haven’t; so if we are so obliged, it isn’t because
we have accepted the terms of the agreement as parties to a contract. So what is the point of casting the argument in the form of a
hypothetical contract?
In the most simple terms the answer is that Rawls conceives of
justice as fairness. The principles of justice should be recognized
as fair impositions on all those subject to them. But what does
fairness demand? It looks as if we have substituted one difﬁcult
and contentious term – fairness – for another – justice. Philosophically anyway, we were in the dark about the demands of justice. We shall not feel illuminated by the announcement that justice
is fairness. We need to see how fairness is construed in detail.
That’s the next task. But already we should have some intimation
of why a social contract argument is an apt instrument for displaying the reasoning of citizens who ponder questions of justice. A
model contract is fair to all parties. Each treats the other as an
independent equal who may accept or reject the proposed terms
depending upon whether his interests and values are served.
In thinking about justice, as arguably in thinking about morality
generally, we give ourselves the task of establishing principles
which command universal assent and we do this by taking into
account the reasons anyone might have for accepting or rejecting
the principles. This requirement has been thought by many to be a
logical implication of the fact that a judgement is a moral principle. Others have supposed that universalizability is a strategy for
establishing the plausibility of moral principles. If we wish others
to accept the principles we propose, we had better ﬁrst step into
their shoes and investigate if they are likely to accept them in the

218

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

light of interests we can presume them to have. Rawls insists on
the universality of the principles of justice.50 One way of presenting this condition is to represent the principles as the outcome of a
contract, an agreement amongst all parties.
This last is a very weak motivation for adopting a contractarian
argument, but, as we shall see, it is important in understanding
one strand of Rawls’s presentation. A more important conception
of the role of fairness in the argument rests on a distinctive view
of how we should think about the problem of justice. We are to
think of the principles of justice as determining the allocation of
beneﬁts and burdens which accrue from the system through which
individuals co-operate. The system must be structured by principles which everyone can recognize as procuring their advantage;
everyone will identify the fruits of their co-operation and make a
claim on them. The strategic way of deriving principles which give
effect to universal advantage is to adopt a deliberative stance
which is impartial between the claims of all who contribute to the
co-operative scheme. From the point of view of any individual who
is seeking rules to govern a co-operative scheme to remedy the
circumstances of justice, egoistic reasoning might suggest that
such a person goes for whatever scheme promotes his best advantage, but a little thought would convince him that the promotion of
his best advantage is hardly likely to commend the scheme to those
others whose co-operation is required. People will demand a system which is fair in the further sense of being the product of
unbiased or impartial reasoning; ‘it should be impossible to tailor
principles to the circumstances of one’s own case’.51 We need a
process of reasoning which embodies this impartiality. Furthermore, we should recognize that impartiality between the claims of
all those who are party to the necessary co-operative scheme
entails that each should be thought of as advancing claims of
equal weight on the product of social co-operation. As Rawls
insists, ‘the purpose of these conditions [of impartiality] is to represent equality between human beings as moral persons, as creatures having a conception of their good and a sense of justice’.52 If
the principles of justice commend a scheme of strict equality in
the distribution of beneﬁts and burdens, no one can complain that
their claims have been ignored or devalued.
So far we have no details of the procedures of the social contract

219

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

account, but already we can see why Rawls’s methodology is
captured by his term ‘reﬂective equilibrium’. We recognize the
necessity for having some principles of justice, but prior to the
elaboration of these principles we recognize that they must conform to deep-seated intuitions. In this case the crucial intuitions
cluster around the idea of fairness. We derive principles that are
binding on all parties because the interest of each party has been
given equal weight in a process of deliberation that is strictly
impartial between their conﬂicting claims. Rawls’s distinctive contribution is to elaborate a hypothetical social contract argument
that does justice to these intuitions. He believes that only a social
contract argument could succeed. Intuitionism, whereby independent principles are endorsed as separately compelling,
cannot serve the purpose because we are unable to judge which
principle should take priority in the case of conﬂict. And further,
such a collection of principles, in the absence of a theory that
binds them together, would have no resources for deciding cases
that strike us as novel, as inappropriate for the application of the
principles with which we are already familiar. Utilitarian reasoning fails because it is judged to compromise the equality of moral
persons as separately the locus of moral claims. It may so fail
where the optimal system of co-operation in point of utility
requires that the well-being of some be sacriﬁced to achieve maximum utility for all, considered as an aggregation of sources of
recorded or expected utility. Uniquely, the social contract method
can yield an ordered and projectible set of principles which is fair in
respect of its recognition of the claims of all parties subject to them.
But this abstract characterization of Rawls’s enterprise needs to
be ﬂeshed out before we can judge its cogency. We need to describe
the impartialist stance – then we shall see more clearly why
the hypothetical social contract is an apt device for practical
reasoning about the subject of justice.
The Original Position
There are two distinctive features of Rawls’s hypothetical social
contract. In deliberating about justice, we place ourselves in
what Rawls calls the Original Position. The ﬁrst feature of this

220

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

hypothetical stance is that we suppose ourselves to be located
behind a veil of ignorance characterized by a speciﬁc combination
of knowledge and ignorance. We are supposed to know:
(1) The thin theory of the good. This is a list of what Rawls
describes as primary social goods, all-purpose means for
achieving a rational long-term plan of life. The thought is that
whatever one’s plan of life turns out to be, rights and liberties,
opportunities and powers, income and wealth, and the social
bases of self-respect, will be needed to accomplish it. Goods are
included on this list only if their distribution can be regulated
by the basic structure of society, the main social institutions.
The basic structure will deﬁne the liberties and powers of subjects and determine the allocation of income and wealth.
Other lists of all-purpose goods may seem more compendious –
Hobbes’s list of natural and instrumental powers is a good
example.53 In the case of items which one may be tempted to
add to Rawls’s list we may ﬁnd that they are speciﬁcations of
goods which already appear there. Knowledge, one may think,
is such an asset, but Rawls believes that the skills and capacities which are the product of education are included as
opportunities or powers. Important personal assets such as
beauty and charm (‘Forme’ and ‘Affability’ on Hobbes’s list)
are not in the gift of government or its agencies. So these natural primary goods will not feature on the list. Health is a moot
example; the onset of disease may be thought of as a brute
contingency, but the odds against suffering disease can be
increased by public health policies and resources can be
shifted around to provide health-care.54 The list of social primary goods, or further speciﬁcation of it, is open-ended. But
however it is speciﬁed, we can suppose that people want more
rather than less of these goods.
(2) The laws of the social sciences. We must suppose, further, that
subjects in the Original Position have a sufﬁcient knowledge of
the facts of social life to work out the policy implications of
the principles they select. ‘They understand political affairs
and the principles of economic theory; they know the basis of
social organization and the laws of human psychology.’55 But
this knowledge, as we shall see, is quite general. It is as though

221

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

they had available the resources of a good social science
library with all proper names erased.
By contrast, we must suppose that, behind the veil of ignorance,
we are ignorant of:
(3) Our place in society, our position in respect of class or social
status, our actual or prospective income and wealth, the natural assets at our disposal – our strength, intelligence or particular psychology – as well as the generation we belong to.
One could add (and others have found these supplementations
of Rawls to be a valuable resource in pursuit of social justice)
ignorance of one’s sex and sexual orientation, race or ethnic
grouping.
(4) Further, we are not to know speciﬁc details of the society we
inhabit, ‘its economic or political situation, or the level of civilization and culture it has been able to achieve’.56
(5) Finally, and most controversially, we do not know our thick
conception of the good. Rawls believes, and as we have seen in
Chapter 3, this is almost deﬁnitive of the liberal position, that
individual persons will differ radically in respect of their conception of the good life, of the details of the plan of life we can
presume them to have adopted. Some persons will pursue the
life of the aesthete, others a life of cheerful vulgarity, hunting,
shooting and ﬁshing. Some will be hedonists, counting the
score of their pleasures, others, ascetics, valuing simplicity or
their triumphs over temptation. Some will be devoted to their
families and friends, others, not quite misanthropes, will seek a
life of limited interpersonal relationships. Some will be atheists or agnostics, seeking to live their life in accordance with
whatever meaning they ﬁnd or construct from their natural
conditions of existence. Others may pursue a life of religious
devotion, and the varieties of religious expression encourage a
particularly noxious tendency towards ﬁssiparity and conﬂict.
As I mentioned before, we can suppose that there are at least as
many widely held conceptions of the good life as there are
monthly magazines on the shelves of the average newspaper
shop – multipled by the possibilities of permutation by conjunction. We come across (in literature, if not too often in life)

222

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

parsons who love to hunt and swill the claret as well as ascetic
atheists with a fastidious taste in modern jazz.
All of these conceptions of the good life are swept behind the
veil of ignorance. We know enough about our fellows behind
the veil of ignorance to understand the magniﬁcent variety of
thick conceptions of the good that will be revealed when the veil is
parted, but we are to presume ourselves ignorant of the contours
of our own plan of life for the purposes of deliberating about
justice.
The motivation behind this hypothetical combination of knowledge and ignorance is the elimination of partiality and bias. How
can I be accused of serving my own distinctive conception of the
good life if I don’t know what it will turn out to be? How can I be
accused of disvaluing the way of life you judge to be best if I don’t
know the plan of life you have selected? The device of hypothetical
ignorance has evident resonances with the way we think about
justice. One way of judging the impact of some proposal or the
justice of some policy is to place oneself in the shoes of some other
party who is affected by it and then ask would the subsequent
distribution of beneﬁts and burdens be acceptable if you didn’t
know which position was the one you occupy. Suppose the dispute
concerned the allocation of housework. Harry doesn’t want to do
any of the work in the kitchen. Sally points out that they both
work outside the home from 9.00a.m. to 5.00p.m. She already does
the washing and the cleaning. If Harry’s proposal, that he do
nothing other than earn his wages, were accepted, there would be
two parties, one doing all the housework, the other doing none.
Asking Harry to hypothesize that he doesn’t know which bundle of
chores he might be assigned is a nice way of bringing home to him
the unacceptability of either party’s being asked to shoulder all
the burdens. If his most advantageous option is crystal clear, so is
that of the other party. If he would hate to have all the chores to
do, he can understand Sally’s complaint and should review the
distribution of tasks.
Some have claimed that Rawls’s theory of the veil of ignorance
in the original position expresses a strong view of the role of the
state as neutral between competing conceptions of the good life,
that this is a clear implication of the doctrine of the priority of the

223

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

right over the good, which Rawls explicitly claims to be a central
feature of his conception of justice.57 I will have something to say
about these issues later, but for the moment I want to stress that
the primary intuition to be cashed out by the requirement of the
hypothetical veil of ignorance is impartiality, not neutrality.
When it comes to articulating, as is necessary, the theory of the
primary goods, Rawls conclusions are not neutral, as one important critic has pointed out.58 The basic structures of society should
not be neutral in respect of their recognition of the value of the
primary goods and their task of promoting them. Although Rawls
believes that detailing the contents of the list of primary goods
amounts to a weak premiss in the overall argument (he clearly did
not anticipate the level of criticism directed towards this aspect of
his theory), the list itself does not present an anodyne prescription
for the activities of the state. In respect of both inclusions within
the list and exclusions from it, the list is controversial. What holds
the list together is the idea of the primary goods as all-purpose
means to whatever thick conception of the good parties may have
developed as rational for themselves to pursue. What governs
exclusions from the list is the thought that the principles of justice
must be the product of a process of deliberation with such a measure of impartiality that it is accessible to all parties. Whether or
not Rawls achieves fairness in the process of deliberating about
justice is an open question. There can be no doubt that he wishes
fairness to constrain these deliberations.
The original position details the hypothetical circumstances in
which we must place ourselves to address the question of justice.
How do we deliberate once we have broached this thoughtexperiment? At this point we meet the second distinctive feature of
Rawls’s social contract approach. Rawls believes we should reason
as egoists seeking to maximize our protections and advance our
holdings of primary goods, helping ourselves to the technical
resources of rational choice theory in order to derive the principles of justice. Let me stress at this point, having introduced the
term ‘egoist’, that Rawls is most deﬁnitely not proposing that we
adopt any variety of egoism. The kind of egoism that is put to
work behind the veil of ignorance is a thesis about the motivation
of the parties who inhabit that hypothetical condition: the primary goods constitute the ends that they value for themselves and

224

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

the principles of justice represent the best means to advance
them.
Now Thomas Hobbes did hold this kind of egoistic view in
respect of the motivation of all persons generally. On his account,
human beings are predominantly motivated by a conception of
what is in their own best interest, and he argued that the rule of
justice, narrowly construed as the principle ‘that men performe
their covenants made’, i.e. keep their promises, could be derived by
anyone who pondered how best to achieve their long-term goal of
commodious living. Hobbes was speaking of us, of how, granted his
theory of human nature, people like us should deliberate about
how to behave. Rawls is not describing our behaviour or the
behaviour of people like us. We are not egoists. Most particularly
we are not egoists because we have a sense of justice and wish to
govern our transactions with each other in accordance with principles we judge to be fair. Self-interest in the original position,
behind the veil of ignorance, is not self-interest beyond it. Selfinterest behind the veil of ignorance is not a strategy of selfinterest at all, because the parties in the original position have
foresworn any of the knowledge that would enable them to advance
the interests distinctive to themselves. In the original position,
subjects do not know who they are or what they want except as
speciﬁed by the conditions of the veil of ignorance. What Rawls
has attempted to capture by his device of the social contract,
the veil of ignorance and the postulate of rational choice is a
method of impartial deliberation on the question of everyone’s
best advantage. Let us see how this deliberation works out.
The principles of justice
In order to see how the argument works, let us ﬁrst state the principles, then outline the argument for them. First, let us state the
general conception of justice:
All social primary goods – liberty and opportunity, income and
wealth, and the bases of self-respect – are to be distributed
equally unless an unequal distribution of any or all of these
goods is to the advantage of the least favored.

225

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

The famous two principles of justice are deemed to be a special
case of this:
First Principle. Each person is to have an equal right to the
most extensive total system of equal basic liberties compatible
with a similar system of liberty for all.
Second Principle. Social and economic inequalities are to be
arranged so that they are both:
(a) to the greatest beneﬁt of the least advantaged, consistent
with the just savings principle, and
(b) attached to ofﬁces and positions open to all under
conditions of fair equality of opportunity.59
Before we proceed, a few clariﬁcatory notes are in order. The
First Principle, the equal liberty principle, has lexical priority in
the special conception. This forbids trade-offs which sacriﬁce
equal liberty to some gain in respect of the other primary goods.
The second element of the Second Principle, equality of opportunity, likewise has lexical priority over the ﬁrst element, the difference principle. The special conception of justice, with its division
of two principles and the associated priority rules, comes into play
when a certain level of prosperity has been reached. Sacriﬁces of
liberty to promote wealth are only justiﬁed when the wealth creation is necessary in order to raise a society to an economic level
where liberty can be enjoyed.60 In Political Liberalism, this standard is sketchily described in terms of citizens’ needs being satisﬁed
– needs expressing requirements which have to be met if citizens
are to ‘maintain their role and status, or achieve their essential
aims’61. We shall concentrate on the special conception, being
convinced that liberty, rather than being an exotic and corrupting
Western implantation that a disciplined emergent society can ill
afford, is a precondition of the creation of sufﬁcient wealth to
meet citizens’ most basic needs. Further, we shall concentrate
in what follows on the Second Principle, barely mentioning the
liberty principle and its priority.62
First though, to capture a central feature of Rawls’s reasoning,
let us look at the argument for the general conception and, a fortiori, for the difference principle. This proposes an equal division of

226

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

the primary goods unless an unequal distribution is to the advantage of the least well off. Why should anyone placed behind the veil
of ignorance in the original position choose ﬁrst, equality, next, if
it represents an improvement, inequality? Remember, behind the
veil of ignorance, contractors do not know their position in society
etc. In these circumstances, Rawls believes, contractors would
adopt a safety-ﬁrst outlook. They would inspect an array of alternative distributions and select those principles which guarantee
the best worst outcome. They would adopt a maximin strategy.
Suppose there are just two classes of people, A and B, and suppose candidate distributions are as follows, the numbers recording
units of primary goods:

(1)
(2)

A
50
30

B
50
150

Rawls thinks his contractors would select outcome (1). Departures
from equality, above and below the level of 50 units, register the
possibility of gains or losses. If the worst outcomes are ranked in
order of which is best, the strategy of maximin requires the choice
of (1), 50 units being better than 30. Contrast (1) however with a
third possibility
(3)

55

65

Since more primary goods are better than less, Rawls believes
contractors who are seeking to advance their holdings will select
(3) in comparison to either (1) or, since (2) has already been judged
inferior to (1), a fortiori, (2). Technically, outcome (3) is ‘weakly
Pareto superior’ to (1). Everyone is better off so it is a change for
the better. Whether they turn out to be in the better-off class or the
worst-off class, they will register an improvement over the
distribution in (1). The difference principle, reﬂecting maximin
reasoning, ranks (3) higher than (1) and (1) higher than (2).
Under conditions of uncertainty, it is controversial which principle of practical reasoning one should adopt in order to rank
alternatives. There are plenty of cases which suggest that maximin, going for the best worst alternative, is counterintuitive. Do

227

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

we climb the mountain or do we stay at home and go out in the
afternoon to see a ﬁlm. Climbing the mountain, one of us may slip
and be killed. We may be killed walking to the cinema, but there’s
less chance of it. Climbing is not very dangerous, but it’s dangerous enough for us always to prefer an alternative way of spending
our free time, so long as we reason in maximin fashion. Were we
maximiners we would never venture onto a steep slope. There is
always something safer we could be doing.
What is the alternative to maximin? It is time to bring the reasoning in favour of (2) out of the woodwork. As (2) suggests, it is
maximum average utility. Between classes A and B, supposing
members of these classes are equal in numbers, one might suppose
that some people, those who like a gamble, would compute average
expected utility at 90 units – and go for it. They may ﬁnd themselves in the class who receive 30 units, and worse off than they
would be under maximin, but they may be better off than they
would be under either equality or the difference principle. If we do
the sums we ﬁnd that average utility under (2) will amount to 90
units (30 plus 150 = 180; the sum divided by 2, = 90 units of utility). Computing in the same fashion, the average utility of (1) is 50;
the average utility of (3) is 60 units of the primary goods. Since the
utility of (2) is greater than the utility of either (1) or (3) why not
go for it? The objection to Rawls can be phrased more strongly as:
what reasons are there for not taking the approach of average
utility, gambling on the chance of being one of the better off, gaining 150 units, and risking the prospect of losing – receiving 30
rather than 50 under equality or 55 under the difference principle?
Rawls’s answer is that we wouldn’t dare.63 We only have one life
to lead and the basic structure of the society in which we live is
crucial to our well-being, and just as importantly, to that of our
children. We would be wrong to risk the possibility of receiving 30
units when we can guarantee the receipt of 50 units or better. The
utilitarian, as ever, has a cogent reply. In the comparison of (1) and
(2), if (2) is represented as an outcome that the proponent of maximum average utilitarianism would endorse, either like is not being
compared with like or the situation is underdescribed. It looks as
though like is not being compared with like since the utilitarian
will be concerned to envisage outcomes primarily in terms of the
distribution of utilities, rather than primary goods. As we saw in

228

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Chapter 2, the utilitarian has reason to believe that the sorts of
allocation that maximize utility will be those that tend towards
equality. With departures from equality, the gainers gain less than
is lost by the losers, so average utility is diminished. If this is right,
the utilitarian can properly ask for more details of how the
unequal distribution of primary goods is supposed to maximize
utility. If it is claimed that the facts of the matter are contingent,
that things might work out this way, the utilitarian can agree, but
insist that, as a matter of fact, they don’t so work out – and Rawls’s
contractors, well aware of the laws of the social world, will be
aware that they don’t.
Let us put this issue to one side and concentrate on the question
of whether we should select (1) the condition of equality, or go for
(3) a situation of inequality in which everyone is better off. The
answer looks obvious. How could it be rational to be the dog in the
manger, refusing to move to a better position on the grounds that
others are doing better still? Rawls insists that it couldn’t. Envy is
irrational. This might be so, but if inequality is known to be a
general cause of envy, human nature being what it is, isn’t this a
reason not to move towards inequality?64 One might point to the
debilitating effects of social hierarchy and a stratiﬁed society, as
we have had occasion to mention, but Rawls has a good reply at
this point. As the second element of the second principle
emphasizes, he insists that there be fair equality of opportunity,
that everyone has the possibility of moving into the positions
which offer the prospect of the highest income and wealth. We
should also notice a corollary. The most mysterious of the primary
goods, which is also mentioned as the most important, is selfrespect or self-esteem, since without self-respect, ‘all desire and
activity becomes empty and vain and we sink into apathy and cynicism. Therefore the parties in the original position would wish to
avoid at almost any cost the social conditions that undermine selfrespect’.65
It is hard to place this primary good into the framework of the
two principles; Rawls seems to think that it is served by the liberty
principle as this is worked up into constitutional arrangements
that guarantee equal political status. We could add that it should
disallow inequalities of income and wealth of such a type and
from such sources as corrupt the sense of the worst off that,

229

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

notwithstanding their lesser holdings are greater than they would
possess under equality, they are treated as, or come to see themselves as, being of lesser moral or social standing than others.
Hegel noticed that the condition of the unemployed can be utterly
demeaning. We have learned that this lack of self-respect may persist even though the unemployed are in receipt of a minimum
social income. If such lesser standing is a consequence of a speciﬁc aetiology of inequality, it should be factored into the index of
primary goods which deﬁnes the condition of the worst off. They
may well judge that despite their greater holdings of income and
wealth, they are overall worse off than they would be under conditions of equality of income and wealth. Clearly everything depends
upon the wider social ramiﬁcations of such differences.
Now we can return to our original question. If basic needs are
met, and if as we have just insisted, inequalities of wealth and
income are not magniﬁed into the sort of social differences that
inhibit equality of opportunity and undermine self-respect, should
we not accept the inequalities that are licensed by the difference
principle? I think we should.
Before we leave the discussion of Rawls and the topic of social
justice, there are a few issues to be tidied up. At the heart of
Rawls’s conception of a just society is a conception of how we
should think about the problem of distribution. We begin with a
Humean conception of ‘a society as a co-operative venture for
mutual advantage’,66 developed as a response to the circumstances
of justice which demand that conﬂicts of interest be resolved. I
take it that this leads us to endorse, as a ﬁrst step, a system of
property rules that govern entitlements, enabling us to judge who
owns what. We noticed when discussing Nozick’s account that
some system of adjudicating property claims is necessary
(although we noticed, too, the absence of any speciﬁcation of what
the appropriate rules might be). I assume that in any stable society
a conservative principle applies which supposes that the rules in
place can be vindicated on grounds of their utility. (I don’t suppose
that either Nozick or Rawls would accept this judgement, but let
us proceed. Both of them, I take it, suppose that we reﬂect upon
the problem of justice against a background of rules having de
facto authority in the jurisdictions which they examine.)
It is only against some such background – of established rules

230

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

and (moderately) successful practice – that we can identify society
as a co-operative venture for mutual advantage. How else? We now
have a fresh problem which Hume did not have to consider because
he thought the problem of justice was settled. Granted that the
institutions in place, with their constituent rules, secure mutual
advantage or general utility, are they just? This question has point
only if we accept that there is a standpoint for asking questions of
justice which departs from the standard of utility. Rawls insists
that there must be. There is the question: Is the distribution of
beneﬁts and burdens fair ? His answer is that it may be, but if it is,
this is a coincidence, a matter of contingency, because the fairness
of the system is to be adjudicated by principles other than utility.
Fairness requires that we review the beneﬁts of social cooperation from the perspective of each of those who are affected by
the scheme in place. Perhaps, as Thomas Scanlon, one of Rawls’s
most constructive critics has insisted, we can ask this question
directly: Can the rules governing the allocation of beneﬁts and
burdens be reasonably rejected by any of those subject to the distributive scheme which is purportively required by principles of
justice?67 If anyone could reasonably reject such a scheme, its
requirements would not meet the standards of universalizability
proposed by Kant and accepted by Rawls.68 Although this is a good
question to ask, given Rawls’s general endorsement of Scanlon’s
variety of contractualism in Political Liberalism and his advertisement of his argument as a species of Kantian constructivism,
we have no clear answer. Rawls’s canonical method is indirect,
employing the original position and its veil of ignorance, because
these argumentative strategems embody the intuitions concerning
impartiality that fairness requires.
So the argumentative apparatus of A Theory of Justice directs us
to appraise the institutions of any stable society from the point of
view of one who requires that the principles be fair, as well as, or
despite, the rules in place serving general utility. The Rawlsian
prospectus, as I have described it, is utterly abstract. It is time to
put some ﬂesh on these bones. Suppose we accept that a free
market economy, based on private property, has demonstrated its
credentials in point of overall utility. (It hasn’t; other sub-optimal
systems, e.g. central government planning, have demonstrated
their inefﬁciency – but then utilitarianism has no a priori

231

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

conclusions to defeat opposing intuitions.69) What Rawls has in
mind as a system of political and economic organization which
satisﬁes his principles of justice is the liberal democratic welfare
state.70 Democracy and liberty are guaranteed by the liberty principle, welfarism by the modiﬁed equality guaranteed by the difference principle. Putting liberty to one side in the context of evaluating distributive justice, we can see that the implementation of
justice, as required by the difference principle, requires a system of
transfers to be imposed upon the system of entitlements that are in
place. Smith owns such and such, given the rules, but . . . Jones
earns such and such, but . . . In each case holdings are reviewed in
the light of the difference principle and transfers to or from Smith
and Jones will be effected by such means as the taxation of income,
sales, inheritance or wealth.
At this point, an obvious objection kicks in. We have a historically determined property system subject to continuous modiﬁcation by application of the difference principle. We have institutions which guarantee equality of opportunity in respect of access
to those ofﬁces and positions which yield the greater income and
wealth in systems where differentials in income and wealth are
judged to improve the position of the worst off, the details presumably ﬁxed by the operation of a market in labour. What place is
there in this system for the application of a principle of desert?71
Desert
We can think of a wide range of circumstances in which different
allocations of income and wealth might be justiﬁed on the grounds
of unequal desert. Smith works harder than Jones, or equally hard
for a longer time, or with the same effort but with more skill, or
with as much effort, for as long, and with as much skill, but at a
dirtier job. In each of these cases, Smith produces more goods, and
untutored intuitions or popular sentiment might have it that
Smith earns a greater reward, deserving the premium his efforts or
skill attracts. Regardless of whether his increased productivity
has beneﬁted the worst off, say through the trickle-down effects of
his economic success, he deserves his unequal receipts. This is not
a case of claims of desert conﬂicting with claims of justice, since it

232

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

will be argued that the reward of desert is an established principle
of justice. So much the worse for a theory of justice that does not
respect such claims.
Rawls distrusts such arguments – and he is quite right to do so;
which is not to say that they have no philosophical weight. He
accepts that persons are born with very different natural endowments. It may be that not only are individuals born with different
skills and talents, but that they are unequally blessed in the ability
to exploit them. Two mountaineers may be equally strong and
agile, but one of them may lack the nerve to tackle the more dangerous routes, or the intelligence to approach them with an
appropriate degree of safety, or the staying-power to proceed in the
face of difﬁculties. Who is to say which of these qualities is not the
product of a natural lottery? If the wonderfully talented jazzplayer has a self-destructive streak it makes as little sense to praise
him for the ﬁrst as blame him for the second. This argument does
not assume some sort of genetic determinism which establishes
that all personal qualities are the product of natural inheritance.
Rather it registers, in more modest fashion, our inability to measure the respective contributions of natural endowment and freely
directed effort towards any speciﬁc accomplishment. Thus, Smith
works harder or longer than Jones – but it may be that he was born
stronger. Grant also that the effects of the natural lottery may be
magniﬁed by favourable personal circumstances – a supportive
family, a solid education, strategically-placed friends – and we can
see that the problem of isolating a distinctively personal contribution as the proper subject of merit or desert becomes even harder.
Of all the moral principles constitutive in their way to the idea of
justice, conceptions of desert are the most puzzling.72
From the standpoint of the original position, desert has no
place. When we deliberate with that quality of impartiality that
embodies fairness, we shall see society as a co-operative endeavour
and adopt the difference principle as ‘an agreement to regard the
distribution of natural talents as a common asset and to share in
the beneﬁts of this distribution whatever it turns out to be’.73 On
the other hand, once we examine the institutions necessary to
implement the principles of justice, we can expect to ﬁnd elements
of the economic system mimicking those residues of desert which
linger in the thought that reward is due to effort or skill, since

233

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

these are the sort of individual qualities that are sought out in the
labour market under conditions of fair equality of opportunity.
Efﬁciency of the kind from which everyone beneﬁts will often
see to it that effort and skill are rewarded (though this cannot
be guaranteed; skills fall out of demand and effort may be
misplaced).74
Such considerations cannot be expected to satisfy those who
insist that desert is a principle independent of incentive effects
and market operations. Everyone dines well at Rawls’s feast, but, it
will be insisted, some have no right to be there. In particular, the
spoiler of many a draft welfare scheme, the wastrel, idler, shirker
or beneﬁts scrounger, should have no seat at the table. This ignoble
character precisely does not co-operate in the scheme for mutual
advantage and is not a worthy recipient of any of its fruits. Far
from being a member of the worst off class and due whatever
amelioration unequal rewards to others may generate, he is due
nothing.
If everyone were born with at least the capacity to develop some
marketable skills, if they were educated to expect work and be
trained to apply their skills in the labour market, if the market
could supply jobs to meet their demand to work, if, in short, we
could distinguish the idle from the unemployable and otherwise
contingently unemployed, this argument would have a great deal
of force. Until these distinctions can be conﬁdently made, it is a
distraction.
The detail of Rawls’s arguments for the two principles of justice
has been subjected to massive technical criticism which I shall
leave readers to pursue for themselves. I hope I have elaborated its
greatest strength – its insistence that the fashioning of principles
of justice (which should include responsiveness to need) requires
us to adopt a deliberative stance that ensures fairness in the speciﬁc sense of impartiality as we review competing claims on the
limited pool of resources. If the aim of the exercise is to produce
principles that all could accept as fairly governing the terms under
which they co-operate with each other, it is vital that such principles do not favour or sacriﬁce the interests of any particular
group of individuals, since, if they were so biased, they would not
command the support of all those whose behaviour they are
designed to regulate. Once one grants the necessity of such a

234

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

deliberative stance it is hard to see how any principle other than
the modiﬁed equality of the diffference principle could ﬁnd
acceptance.
The communitarian challenge
Before we leave the topic of distributive justice, we should examine
(too brieﬂy) a set of claims, widely advanced in response to Rawls’s
work, to the effect that the deliberative stance of fairness, as I have
explained it, is just not possible for creatures like us. This challenge has been made by a number of thinkers who have been
grouped together as communitarians. Amongst contemporary
philosophers, the most prominent communitarians include Alasdair MacIntyre, Charles Taylor, Michael Sandel and Michael
Walzer. One has to be careful in thinking of these philosophers as
members of a distinctive school or group, since the differences
between them are often as great as their similarities.75 I shall
broach just a portion of their work in concentrating on their
criticism of Rawls’s (and other liberal theories) of justice.
I have claimed that the distinctively valuable contribution of
Rawls’s theory of justice is his attempt to articulate an appropriate
stance from which to deliberate the problem of justice. We take up
the Original Position, locating ourselves behind the veil of ignorance and seeking to advance our holdings of primary goods. In so
doing, we abstract ourselves in thought from the societies we
inhabit and the concrete relationships in which we stand to other
people. We deem ourselves ignorant of those goods which endow
our lives with the particular meanings we ascribe to them, the
thick theories of the good to which we subscribe. Communitarians
object that we cannot conduct this exercise of intellectual
abstraction, or, if we could, such abstraction could not yield principles of justice which would command our allegiance once we
have departed the Original Position and relocated ourselves in our
given, historically conditioned communities.
Now readers may have registered any number of doubts concerning the course of Rawls’s argument. I have tried to explain the
point of Rawls’s exercise in abstraction, his withdrawal behind
the veil of ignorance into the original position, in terms of a

235

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

pretheoretical commitment to fairness, but critics may charge that
this manoeuvre is unnecessary or unsuccessful. They may ask why
individuals who do not live behind a veil of ignorance should
regard themselves as committed to principles they would adopt
were they, hypothetically, to ﬁnd themselves so located. Rawls,
operating in the social contract tradition, has advocated something like a thought-experiment in order to advance our thinking
about justice. The ﬁrst element of the communitarian challenge is
the striking claim, not that the thought-experiment is otiose or
fruitless, but that we cannot genuinely conduct it.
Construction of the Rawlsian hypothetical contract requires
that we think of ourselves as discrete individuals capable of dissociating from the ethical ties that bind us to others in our communities. We must be able to do this if we are to examine whether
such ties are just. I think it appropriate as a poor man to doff my
cap as the rich man enters the gate of his castle. Someone may
challenge my habitual deference and cause me to think hard about
my hitherto unexamined place in the established hierarchy. For a
Rawlsian, the form of rationality distinctive of philosophizing
about justice requires such exercises in detachment. Once I accept
the demand that familiar obligations and allegiances be subject to
rational examination, I should seek to distance myself in thought
from the fact of my allegiance in order to conduct my investigation. If, as a matter of fact, I can’t achieve the independence of
thought necessary to attain such detachment, if I am so absorbed
by the practices of my community that I cannot put them to question, then I can’t deliberate about justice. Rawls’s Original Position represents an ethical stance external to the obligations up for
inspection which guarantees that my reﬂections will be conducted
in an impartial spirit.
For the communitarian, such detachment and dissociation are
impossible. I am constituted by a deep network of ends and purposes, furnished, willy-nilly, by the established social structures of
the society in which I was raised. The interpersonal commitments
which these ends and purposes embody comprise my identity as
the person I am. It would not be me who retreated behind the veil
of ignorance, but some shadowy simulacrum. How could it be me,
if I am required to shed, in thought, constitutive ideals which contribute essentially to the identiﬁcation of who I am, ideals which

236

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Rawls has allocated to the theoretically inert realm of the ‘thick
conception of the good’. Take Holy Willie, the subject of Burns’s
eponymous poem, ‘Holy Willie’s Prayer’. The reader may suppose
that Willie cannot, without becoming someone else, entirely
detach himself from his Calvinist principles, and speciﬁcally, his
sense that he is one of the Elect. Since he speaks to himself
(though he is sure that his God is listening), we should judge him
to be disabled by self-deception rather than common-or-garden
hypocrisy.
Read the poem. You might think that Holy Willie has got things
wrong somewhere – agreeing with Burns and most of his readers
on this. He is clearly unable to confront seriously the question of
whether the rigorous standards which he uses to judge the conduct
of others, apply equally to himself. The syndrome is familiar. If
this is a true description of Willie’s state of mind, I think he is
constitutionally unable to deliberate about moral questions.
I can’t tackle here the range and sophistication of communitarian arguments against liberalism. Their prime focus, in any case, is
Rawls’s philosophical methodology rather than his speciﬁc contribution to discussions of distributive justice. But we know enough
about the communitarian position to understand that the heart of
it is a claim about the limits of our reasoning powers, about how
far we can dissociate ourselves in thought from the values that
frame our concrete social identities. There are some questions that
we cannot ask – or, if we can ask them, that we cannot take seriously because we cannot achieve the detachment necessary to see
the questions as open. We are, as a matter of fact, constrained in
respect of the ethical questions we are able to tackle. A favoured
example of this sort of constraint in operation concerns a good
parent’s inability to contemplate seriously whether she has an
obligation to promote a child’s welfare. Love will blind her to a
review of the pro’s and con’s.
This may or may not be true. If it is true, it will be true because
that is how human beings characteristically think about these
matters. I cannot see how questions of distributive justice might
become practically otiose in a similar fashion. Once folks learn
how to question the conventional allocation of beneﬁts and burdens, Pandora’s box is open. It might be hard to attain the
impartiality required by Rawls’s invocation of the Original

237

DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE

Position. It might be even harder to stick with the principles of
justice furnished by this ethical stance once the thoughtexperiment is concluded. Some may be unable to achieve the
required detachment, some may fail to carry through the principles derived by their intellectual efforts, but I cannot see how any
philosophical arguments could be expected to demonstrate that
the attempt to reﬂect on principles of justice is overambitious.

238

Chapter 6

Political obligation

The problems
Alfred Russell Whitehead is said to have said that all philosophy is
a series of footnotes to Plato and Aristotle. It is a good saying and
wouldn’t be such a memorable falsehood if it did not contain a
strong element of truth. It is a falsehood because, in the tradition
of Western philosophy the Pre-Socratic philosophers deserve a
mention. But just as obvious, there are more philosophical problems than were dreamt of by Plato and Aristotle in their philosophies (but perhaps not many more) and, equally, the repertory
of arguments pro and con, the range of responses to these problems, has been enlarged well beyond the category of footnotes. But
one can easily mistake the show for the substance in respect of
touted philosophical advances. Another way of making Whitehead’s point would be to say that Plato and Aristotle ‘set the
agenda’ and this would be more true as well as more trendy, but
still a falsehood. However, there is one philosophical problem
which has not advanced far beyond the elaboration of Plato’s

239

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

arguments and the development of challenges to it: the problem of
political obligation.
In the Crito, Socrates is invited to collude with the plans of Crito
and other friends and admirers who sympathize with his predicament by escaping gaol and the imminent (self)inﬂiction of the sentence of death. He will be quite safe, he is assured, in Thessaly. If
he accedes to Crito’s scheme (the gaoler is beholden to him and
informers can be bought off) Socrates will evidently be failing to
fulﬁl the duties of a citizen of Athens. Should he or shouldn’t he
take up Crito’s invitation? Should he do what the city requires of
him? Or should he attempt to escape? Plato represents Socrates
speaking in the voice of the Laws and Constitution of Athens and
this voice argues convincingly in favour of his accepting the
decreed punishment. The major themes of Socrates are ﬁrst that
he has consented to obey the laws and so to ﬂee would be to break
the covenants and undertakings he freely made; second, that he
has received evident beneﬁts from the city, that he ought to be
grateful for these beneﬁts, and that since by ﬂeeing the city he
would be doing it harm, this would be an ill return for the beneﬁts
received. These two arguments, the consent argument and the
argument from received beneﬁts have dominated the literature
ever since, though they have taken many different forms, as we
shall see.
First though, we should try to become clear about the precise
nature of the problem of political obligation. We do best to think
of our political obligations as obligations owed by us as citizens to
the state. It is tempting to elucidate this concept by ﬁrst outlining
the general nature of an obligation and then explaining how speciﬁcally political obligations are to be construed. Such a course
would require us to distinguish obligations from duties, and perhaps duties from reasons for action of a distinctively moral sort.
The enterprise would be tricky and maybe interesting, but I am
reluctant to engage in it for two reasons: in the ﬁrst place, I doubt
whether the exercise could be successfully concluded without
excessive semantic legislation. Such distinctions could no doubt
be forced. The language could be cleared up by careful stipulation
which builds on distinctions made in the way we generally speak. I
have no ambitions in this direction and, since judgement on
whether such an exercise is valuable or pointless would have to

240

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

wait upon its outcome, I shall do no more here than register my
doubts. In the second place, our chief interest is in the speciﬁc
issue of political obligation, and it may well be the case that whatever distinctions can be traced between, say, obligations and duties
taken generally, do not apply in the speciﬁc context of political
obligation. In fact, I think this is the case. It makes no difference
whether we speak of the political obligations incumbent on citizens or of the duties of citizens or, to my ear, of the moral reasons
citizens should recognize as governing their conduct with respect
to the political institutions of the state. The last of these locutions
is a mouthful, so I shall try to avoid it. The ﬁrst has all the virtues
and vices of familiarity. I prefer the second.
My reason is informal and pragmatic. The concepts of legal obligation and political obligation are closely linked and the closeness
of the linkage invites a narrowness of focus I wish to avoid. We
speak of legal obligation when we wish to identify the demands
legitimately made of subjects within a particular legal system. The
model here is that of the (generally justiﬁed)1 coercive law,
proscribing or prescribing conduct on penalty of sanctions for
non-compliance. Speaking substantively, our legal obligations
comprise our obligations to obey the law. There may be one big
legal obligation – to obey the law – or as many obligations as there
are prescriptive or proscriptive laws. We are apt to think that political obligations march in step with legal obligations, and this is a
natural assumption since legislation is a political process, effected
or authorized by the sovereign. So we are apt to think that political
obligation equates to the obligation to obey the law. If so, we are in
error.
I think we have a political obligation wherever good moral
reasons dictate the terms of our relationship with the political
institutions of the state. If there are good moral reasons why we
should obey the laws promulgated by the state, then we have a
political obligation to obey the law. If there are good moral reasons
why we should follow a call to arms made by the state, then we have
a political obligation to volunteer. If there are are good moral
reasons why we should participate in processes which elect representatives or enact laws through plebiscites, then we have a political obligation to do these things. Since I recognize that this list of
standard political obligations is wider than is sanctioned by the

241

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

customary association of political and legal obligation, and since I
don’t want to beg the conceptual questions canvassed above, I
think it most felicitous in point of style to speak of the duties of
the citizen. There is nothing odd about the thought that citizens
may have duties to volunteer some service to the state or vote in
elections in circumstances where such conduct is not required of
them on pain of sanction.
So the problem of political obligation is not on my account the
narrow question of whether citizens have an obligation to obey the
law. That problem can perfectly well be pursued within a wider
agenda that includes other duties that may be imputed to the citizen. It may well take centre stage because characteristically the
duty to obey the law is a duty that is exacted against the citizen and
so one might expect arguments in favour of it to be the strongest
available. But it is not the only duty that is in question, and, as we
shall see, the question of whether we have such a duty may be most
clearly answered in a context which brings into view other duties
which citizens may recognize. That said, for the moment we shall
retain the traditional focus on the duty to obey the law in order to
frame more clearly other introductory questions.
The ﬁrst such question concerns the ambition of the arguments
that purport to establish this duty. How universal is the scope of
application of the argument? Are these arguments designed to
show that if any citizen should recognize such a duty then so
should all?2 Or may the arguments be custom-built, bespoke to the
demands of citizens, severally? The classical liberal dialectic can
be envisaged as a series of claims made by the state against citizens
who independently review the cogency of these claims. The state
advances its claims by way of arguments directed to all citizens.
But each modern citizen assumes the right to examine these
arguments independently. We imagine the state rehearsing its
arguments because no modern state can expect its claims to be
vindicated solely on the basis of its pre-established authority.3
The state hopes that its arguments will be of universal validity,
convincing everyone. But of course it may not succeed. The arguments it employs may be failures, convincing no one, or they may
be partially successful, convincing some but not all of those to
whom they are addressed. I shall suggest that this is likely, and so
shall represent the state as advancing a series of arguments that

242

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

successively widen the net over those it seeks to convince of its
legitimate authority. The following outcomes are possible: (a) no
argument convinces any citizen; (b) at least one argument convinces some citizens; (c) all citizens are convinced by at least one
argument; but they are different arguments for different citizens;
(d) there is at least one argument that convinces all citizens that
they have a duty to obey the law. Outcome (d) is best for the state,
but it may turn out that the state need not be so ambitious. If, as
the dialectic proceeds, it transpires that there are no citizens who
can reject every one of the arguments the state advances (outcome
(c)), then its objective – of laying a legitimate claim to the obedience of all citizens – has been achieved. Third best, from the point
of view of the state, would be the acceptance by most citizens of
some of the arguments it puts forward.
The next question concerns the content of the state’s requirements, a second dimension to its ambitions. The state, as we have
surmised, will lay claim to the obedience of all of its citizens, for
one reason or another. But does the state’s claim on the obedience
of its citizens require that they obey all of its laws? I think not.
Again, this is too ambitious. First, we should recognize that the
laws in place are likely to be a ramshackle collection. They are
likely to be cluttered with dead wood. Alert students of the law of
modern states will recognize plenty of laws in desuetude, relics of
forms of life long gone, governing, perhaps, the rules of the road
according priority to horses over pedestrians or vice versa. The
invocation of such rules, as in the case of Shaw v. Director of
Public Prosecutions,4 whereby the Star Chamber offence of ‘conspiracy to corrupt public morals’ was resurrected to convict poor
Shaw, is widely deemed unjust. Second, some laws seem designed
to be broken so long as law-breaking remains within acceptable
limits. I confess to having broken the licensing laws as a juvenile
drinking below the age of state consent, as an adult serving drinks
after closing time, and as a parent buying alcohol for my under-age
children. (If you are not sympathetic to this example, think of your
violation, as driver or willing accessory, of the Road Trafﬁc Acts.)
We are all, all of us car-drivers, law-breakers on a regular basis.
So we shouldn’t be too po-faced (unless we have chosen to be
politicians!) about the content of the requirement to obey the law.
To be effective at all, laws need to be precise in contexts which

243

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

defy calculation and invite contravention. Citizens, unless they are
paradoxically pernickety, know this too well, and are willing to
accept, say, parking ﬁnes, as a tax rather than accept the imputation of moral wrong-doing which they would generally attach
to law-breaking. They invoke parameters, of good luck or good
judgement, where the law asserts speciﬁc constraints. Are such
‘criminals’ self-deceiving or do they draw ﬁne but valid distinctions concerning the import of the criminal law? The argumentative terrain is unfamiliar to philosophers, but certain obvious
truths deserve to be recited. Unless one accepts that all illegal
behaviour is morally wrong – which is the question too often up for
begging – one will be hard put to explain the wrongness of welljudged, unimpugned and harmless, law-breaking. The most sensible conclusion to reach, in the face of the philosopher who insists
that we should emulate the rare but precious driver who never, or
hardly ever, exceeds 70m.p.h. on a motorway, is that the state
requires, not so much absolute literal obedience to its declared
laws, as a disposition to law-abidingness.
This whole issue is cluttered by the evident overlap of laws and
moral requirements. Where the dictates of law repeat and thereby
endorse the requirements of morality, the scope for unashamed
law-breaking will be severely constrained. Where the conduct is
conventionally regulated – there must be some limit on the speed
of cars, some limit on the age of permissible drinking of alcohol:
what should it be? – one may expect social tolerance and personal
insouciance. The most a sensible state will require, in respect of
the private judgements, if not public statements by its representatives, is that citizens are disposed to take seriously its regulations,
disposed within parameters of realistic laxity, to obey its laws.
This is not quite the view, as told me by a local policeman, that
Sicilians regard the trafﬁc laws as possibly useful advice.
Finally, one should realize that laxity, on the part of the state,
and low standards, on the part of the citizens, are one thing, conscientious disobedience quite another. This issue is too complex to
take on board in its ﬁne detail here. But we are required, as a ﬁnal
qualiﬁcation to the thesis that the duties of the citizen require her
to obey all of the laws, to acknowledge that normally obedient
citizens may ﬁnd, as a matter of idiosyncratic but not thereby mistaken moral beliefs, that they cannot, in good conscience, obey the

244

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

law. They may judge that the proper duty of the citizen in such
cases is to disobey the law. In these (possibly tragic) circumstances,
the state must accept the possibility that well-meaning citizens
may get things right or wrong, without impugning the overall
authority of the state. Indeed, such citizens may endorse this
authority, in a peculiarly self-denying but recognizable fashion, if
they invite prosecution as the inevitable, but publicity-acquiring,
cost of disobedience.5 They may view their disobedience as the
most appropriate, because most effective, way of discharging their
citizenly duty to participate in the enactment of just laws. Civil
disobedience in appropriate circumstances may well be one of the
duties of the good citizen.
The last formal point I shall raise concerns the stringency of the
duties of the citizen. We should consider, in the ﬁrst place,
whether the duties are conditional or unconditional. Hobbes
believed that the duties of the citizen were unconditional in the
precise sense that their successful ascription did not require the
fulﬁlment of any duty on the part of the sovereign. He used both
formal and substantive arguments to make this point. Formally,
the contract which is the normative basis of the citizens’ duties is a
contract made amongst the citizens themselves, ‘a Covenant of
every man with every man’. The sovereign is not a party to the
contract: ‘That he which is made Soveraigne maketh no Covenant
with his subjects beforehand, is manifest.’6 Since for Hobbes,
duties can only arise by the voluntary concession of a liberty, and
since the sovereign concedes nothing, the sovereign has no duties
to the citizens which might operate as conditions on the citizens’
fulﬁlment of their duties in turn. If this argument works by applying Hobbes’s analytical apparatus to the facts of the matter (a
Covenant was made amongst the people, the sovereign did not in
fact take part, etc. . . .), it is worthless, since there are no facts to
support it. The strength of the argument relies upon its standing
as a reconstruction of how rational agents would behave were
there, hypothetically, no government. Against the background of
such a thought-experiment, Hobbes conjectures that rational
agents would not endorse a limited sovereign, since, if the sovereign’s competence were limited, his performance would be subject
to adjudication. If the possibility of such adjudication were to be
institutionalized, this would require an institution superior to the

245

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

sovereign to make a judgement of whether the sovereign had complied with his duties – and that institution would be the true sovereign. If, on the other hand, adjudication of whether or not the
sovereign had met the conditions which constrain his exercise of
sovereign power were not institutionalized, each citizen would
retain exactly that power of private judgement which creates the
problems of the state of nature in the ﬁrst place, problems which
the institution of the sovereign is designed to resolve. For Hobbes,
there are these alternatives: either an absolute, unconditional sovereign and its corrollary, a citizen body with unconditional duties,
or a degeneration of political life back into the state of nature, the
condition of anarchy.7 Life under even the worst, most self-serving,
sovereign could not be as bad as reversion to the state of nature.
Hobbes’s rigorous and daunting conclusion is disputed by John
Locke, whose arguments, again, I brutally condense. Hobbesian
man, famously, is motivated primarily by self-interest. He seeks to
preserve his life and to enjoy commodious living. Lockean man is
motivated by these goods, too, but in addition, he respects the
tenets of natural law: ‘Reason, which is that Law, teaches all Mankind, who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent,
no one ought to harm another in his Life, Health, Liberty or Possessions.’8 Such duties comprise a set of natural (negative) rights –
‘side-constraints’ in Nozick’s useful terminology. Rational citizens
recognize that such rights need to be enforced by punishment, but
realize that effective punishment requires a state. Hence they
would endorse a state which served the speciﬁc purposes of protecting the rights everyone claims. It follows that they would have
no duty to obey a state whose demands exceed, and powers reach
beyond, what is necessary to carry out this speciﬁc function and a
right to rebel against a state which actively threatened the rights it
was instituted to protect. The conclusion of this line of argument
is that the duties of the citizen are conditional on the state’s fulﬁlment of its assigned duties.
Should we deem the authority of the state to be absolute or
limited, the duties of the citizen, unconditional or conditional on
the satisfactory exercise of the powers assigned to the state?
Should we follow Hobbes or Locke?9 Technical weaknesses undermine Hobbes’s position, since rational individuals could not be
understood to give up their right of self-preservation and must

246

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

retain a power of judging how far the state threatens rather than
secures their life prospects. But aside from this, at the heart of
Hobbes’s defence of absolutism is an empirical claim that the
worst of governments is better than the state of nature. This supposes ﬁrst, what many will dispute, that Hobbes is correct in
describing life in the state of nature as so awful – ‘solitary, poore,
nasty, brutish, and short’.10 But granting him this; it certainly does
not follow that any sovereign is better. He was quite wrong to
suppose that the self-interest of sovereigns would invariably counsel them to promote the well-being of their people, ‘in whose vigor
consisteth their own strength and glory’.11 To be fair to Hobbes, the
sovereign he envisaged was more like a jolly Restoration monarch
than a Pol Pot or Hitler, his main concern being to let his subjects
get back to dancing round the maypole whilst he sorted out the
fractious clerics who disturbed the peace. But this won’t do for the
twentieth or twenty-ﬁrst centuries. No state is so poor – think of
Haiti – that a Papa or Baby Doc can’t enrich himself at the expense
of his tyrannized people and salt away the proceeds in some secure
Swiss Bank prior to a hasty departure and secure retirement. Tyranny may even undermine the rationality of those who inﬂict it,
dictators becoming madder than most of their citizens and striking out at them in a deadly uninhibited fashion. In the matter
of the rationality of absolute sovereigns, history rather than
Hobbes’s cod psychology is decisive.
This judgement supposed, what Hobbes thought most efﬁcacious, that the absolute sovereign would be a single ﬁgure, a
monarch or her modern equivalent, the dictator with a gang of
henchmen. Arguably, the position is different if the absolute sovereign is the people, as in a direct democracy, or complex, articulated, representative institutions governed by the rule of law. In
such cases, more attention has to be paid to the meanings of ‘absolute’ and ‘limited’ sovereignty and it may well turn out that absolute authority and unconditional duty are not correlative terms.
For the moment we should draw the more modest conclusion that
citizens’ duties are conditional on the proper exercise of sovereign
power, however that is characterized.

247

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

Anarchism and communitarianism
Before we proceed to examine the cogency of the arguments
advanced by the state we should notice two dissenting voices to the
enterprise as I have characterized it. The ﬁrst such voice – that of
the anarchist – insists that we are attempting the impossible. Since
the state is an evil, the effort to justify it is wasted ink, rhetoric
designed to dignify a solecism. The second voice also emphasizes
the futility of the exercise, but on radically different grounds. The
communitarian (I can think of no better soubriquet) disputes a
crucial presupposition of the exercise – that we have the philosophical resources or intellectual capacity to conduct the enquiry.
We are assuming that the citizen is able to detach herself from the
force of social duties which bind her and investigate, as it were
from the outside, the credentials of the claims of the state. In this
respect we help ourselves to a distinctively liberal assumption –
that the claims of the state are susceptible to review on the part of
citizens.
In a passage we have noticed before, Kant expressed this
assumption nicely in the ﬁrst Preface to The Critique of Pure
Reason:
Our age is the genuine age of criticism, to which everything
must submit. Religion through its holiness and legislation
through its majesty commonly seek to exempt themselves from
it. But in this way they excite a just suspicion against themselves, and cannot lay claim to that unfeigned respect that reason grants only to that which has been able to withstand its free
and public examination.12
The communitarian, as I distinguish that position, challenges this
distinctively liberal claim that the authority of the state can be
subjected to the requirements of rational legitimation. Both of
these positions – the anarchist and the communitarian – are
worthy of lengthy examination. We shall have to treat them
briskly.
First, then, anarchism. It is impossible to portray the depth and
richness of anarchist writings on the small canvas available here.13
But we can state the central elements of the anarchist case. The

248

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

characterization I shall offer will be a composite picture, the elements drawn from a range of classical and modern theorists. I hope
it will serve to draw readers to the great anarchist texts, not least
because anarchism is surely the most attractive of the great
political ‘-isms’ through the generosity of its various conceptions
of human nature and its optimism concerning the possibility of
human goodness. This point is worth stressing right at the start of
any treatment of anarchism, because the conventional associations of the term ‘anarchy’ and its cognates are so disreputable.
Speak of the anarchist and thoughts drift towards Victorian
images, Conrad’s Secret Agent, and stories of Peter the Painter and
the Siege of Sidney Street, pictures of black-coated, top-hatted
foreigners ready to lob a smoking bomb in the direction of some
royal carriage.
One belief is distinctive of all versions of anarchism: the state is
an evil too great to be tolerable. ‘All coercion is an evil’, thought
John Stuart Mill but on his account it may evidently be the lesser
of two evils, notably when it is threatened or inﬂicted by the state
in order to prevent some folk harming others. The anarchist would
demur, believing either that the cure (laws, police, criminal courts
and gaols) is worse than the disease (immorality or law-breaking)
or, more radically, that the touted cure may be the cause of the
illness. We shan’t attempt here to deﬁne the state – it’s hard to
deﬁne anything that has a history – but Max Weber’s account will
serve: the state is whichever institution successfully claims ‘a
monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given
territory’.14 The anarchist will latch on to the element of this
epithet which employs the idea of physical force and claim that
the institutional use of physical force against persons is always
wrong, because physical force is generally unnecessary to prevent
wrong-doing.
This claim may strike you as incredible. You may look around (or
more likely read the newspapers) and observe (or read about)
thieves and murderers galore. This may justly be deemed the
Hobbesian perspective on current affairs. We may correctly judge
ourselves to be vulnerable to these criminals, or, perhaps exaggerating our vulnerability, may nonetheless demand a quality of protection that we cannot provide for ourselves. Isn’t it reasonable,
not to call our neighbour a knave – that might result in our being

249

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

sued for defamation – but to assume that he may be one and in light
of this possibility, however remote, insure ourselves against the
eventuality? Isn’t the endorsement of a state with effective
coercive mechanisms the best form of insurance? The anarchist
insists not.
Once the state is at work, commanding people to do this, punishing them for doing that, the mechanisms of threat and enforcement
will undermine the moral consciousness of citizens. The capacities
that individuals have to decide what morality requires of them will
shrink and petrify, for want of active engagement. Citizens ask:
What does the law require? What penalties might contravention
incur? What is the risk of suffering them? Is the game worth the
candle? True moral agents, by contrast, consider only whether
proposed lines of conduct are morally right, wrong or permissible
and invest effort in the employment of the reﬂective capacities that
can give them an answer. Citizens of the state have no more moral
authenticity than a ventriloquist’s doll; they mouth the rules that
the state legislates. It is unsurprising therefore that the moral
dwarfs who are the product of the densely coercive activities of the
state, activities which reach into the home, practices of education
and maybe religion, too, will act wickedly if they identify an
opportunity to advance their own interests by harming others with
impunity. Under the regime of a coercive state it is reasonable to
assume your neighbour is a knave, but this assumption holds only
under the conditions of moral ineptitude that the state induces.
This is the gist of Rousseau’s criticism of Hobbes and other
theorists of the state of nature: ‘in speaking of the savage, they
described a social man.’15 So far as the interpretation of Hobbes
goes, Rousseau is mistaken; Hobbes only ever attempted to
describe the psychology of social man, himself and his contemporaries. The state of nature was a hypothetical construction,
a portrayal of how man as we experience him would behave were
there no sovereign power. It was never intended to portray prepolitical social relations, as Rousseau attempts to do. But Rousseau
is right in his substantive point that descriptions of human nature
that proceed from data concerning mankind’s psychology and
behaviour in conditions governed by the state should not purport
to be universal if there is any possibility that humans might think
and act differently were they not to live under the shadow cast by

250

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

the state’s employment of physical force. This is the opportunity
that the anarchist exploits and it yields a rich literature.
Has the coercive apparatus of the state suffused our decisionmaking to the point where we either unthinkingly endorse the
state’s commands or surreptitiously contravene them for reasons
of self-interest? Our inclination is to deny the charge – after all, it
is directed against us and neither alternative is admirable. It is we,
we docile, unreﬂective citizens of whatever state, who are alleged
to be the moral incompetents the anarchist describes. And so the
anarchist expects massive resistance to her most fundamental
claim. Who will admit that their reasoning and decision-making is
corrupt? The issue would be a stand-off, with the anarchist position perhaps weakened by its whiff of knowing unimpugnability
(who knows what folks would be like if . . . ?) if there were no
empirical evidence available to decide the issue. But fortunately
there is, and it does not make comfortable reading.
In the early 1970s, Stanley Milgram conducted a series of
experiments which exposed people’s willingness to obey authority.
His (unknowing) experimental subjects accepted the invitation to
take part in trials which required them to inﬂict pain on ostensible
subjects (mercifully, good actors) who answered questions wrongly.
The experimental scenario was designed to emphasize the authority of those who conducted the experiment – it stank of science,
which is to say the experiments took place in a university and the
instructors wore white coats. The lessons were salutary – to the
point that Milgram’s work should be Lesson One in any course
designed to educate children in how to be a good citizen. Willingly,
although often reluctantly and against their evidently better
judgement in many cases, far too many subjects did what they were
told and inﬂicted what they believed to be great pain upon the
actors. The lesson is humbling – who knows what you or I would
have done had we been recruited as experimental subjects? We
hope, pray and trust that we would have been amongst the very
small minority who resisted the imperatives communicated by the
authoritative scenario. But we cannot deny the claim that we
would likely be dupes who would collude with the requests made of
us in the name of scientiﬁc advance.16
If we are likely to behave like this because we believe that the
pursuit of knowledge requires our collaboration and obedience,

251

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

how realistic is the thought that we would be heroically independent when the state calls upon us to follow the rules? Might not the
habits of deferential compliance revealed in Milgram’s experimental subjects be a consequence of our induction into rigmaroles
of obedience sanctioned and supervised by the state? Whatever its
origin, our tendency to obey authority runs deep and it undercuts
our ability to review our conduct in light of the thought that it
might be misplaced. It might never occur to us that what we are
doing is wrong, and even if it does occur to us, we might have lost
the capacity to deliberate in an independent fashion about how we
ought to behave. As Mill instructs us in On Liberty,17 this capacity
is threatened by authority and needs liberty to ﬂourish. Anarchy is
the extremity of liberty, as the anarchist emphasizes.
Most discussions of anarchy focus on the possibility of resolving conﬂict and achieving the rewards of co-operation without the
state apparatus of rules and sanctions. And as one might expect,
the discussions are inconclusive since at bottom the issues are
empirical, the facts are contested and conclusive experiments
impossible. Models of successful anarchy are available18 and
examples of efﬁcient yet anarchical practice should be familiar to
most readers. My own favourite example is the unregulated Boyd
Orr car-park in the University of Glasgow which daily accommodates a greater density of vehicles than any planner pushing a
white-line machine would dare prescribe – and rarely are exits
blocked. But the sceptic asks, cogently, whether such examples, as
well as the case-histories beloved of anarchists, of ungoverned
communities managing better than their closely regulated neighbours,19 can be persuasively generalized without signiﬁcant losses
of welfare. What would be the anarchist equivalent of the National
Health Service or, for that matter, the armed forces, if citizens
were to move towards anarchy in one country? One does not need
to be a Hobbesian (or even take a quasi-Hobbesian approach,
emphasizing the priority rather than the ubiquity of self-interest)
to worry about one’s vulnerability. The conscientious can get
things wrong, the pure-in-heart can pursue evil ends, and the
incorruptible can resolutely send their compatriots to the gallows
or the guillotine.
It is easy to reconstruct debates which are irresolvable, and this
I suspect is one of them. I think it is a great and cheering lesson

252

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

that the anarchist will not be silenced, not least since her survival
attests the extension of human kindness and generosity into the
emotionally arid ﬁelds of political speculation. But I do not expect
many readers to enlist under the black ﬂag of anarchism and confess, with just a little measure of shame, that I do not do so myself.
I don’t trust you enough to dispense with the forces of law and
order, and suspect, without being self-deceiving, that most of you
would not trust me enough either. And sadly, I cannot assure
myself that your distrust would not be justiﬁed. The Achilles heel
of anarchism is that little bit of self-doubt that generates suspicion
which prompts caution and quickly ramiﬁes into demands for the
kind of security which only the state can provide.
Before we leave the topic of anarchism we should note a distinctive modern variant – that of philosophical anarchism. This takes
two forms. The ﬁrst is primarily a sceptical position induced by the
perceived failure of all arguments in favour of the authority of the
state and citizens’ consequent duties to support it. Since we shall
be reviewing a range of standard arguments in what follows, we
should reserve judgement on this conclusion. The second brand of
philosophical anarchism, elegantly stated in modern times by
Robert Paul Wolff, argues that acceptance of the authority of the
state is inconsistent with the highest duty of mankind, the duty to
act autonomously. To accept the authority of the state is to accept
the moral weight of the fact that the state makes demands on our
conduct, quite independently of our judgement of the rightness or
wrongness of what the state requires us to do. (This moral weight
need not be decisive or overriding.) Yet, ‘for the autonomous man,
there is no such thing, strictly speaking, as a command’.20 Autonomy requires that each moral agent deliberate independently on
how they should behave. Authority requires that those subject to it
give up their autonomous moral judgement over the domain that
authority governs. The value of autonomy deems this submission
to be irrational. This is a striking thesis – but having stated it in
brisk terms, I am content to leave it on the table, since discussion
of it would take us too far aﬁeld. Further consideration of it
requires these things: careful elaboration of the concept of
authority and the investigation of the standing and claims of speciﬁcally political authority; further articulation of the concept of
autonomy and a clear view of the strength of the duty to act

253

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

autonomously; and lastly an explicit judgement of how far the
autonomy of the agent is compromised by his submission to the
authority of the state or his acceptance of political obligation. All
of these matters are controversial, with very deep ramiﬁcations in
moral philosophy.21
Reluctantly, let us put anarchism to one side and consider the
other claim that there is no philosophical problem of political
obligation. The communitarian22 does not advance his argument
on the ground that nothing can justify an institution as evil as the
state, rather he claims that the state is immune to the demand for
rational legitimation. I think, endorsing the judgement of Kant
that we cited above, that this conclusion should sound incredible
to the modern ear. ‘This is the genuine age of criticism.’ So let us
try to make it sound persuasive. Let us advance the most plausible
case.
We can begin with an analogy. Consider family life – or family
life that is going well – or, best – family life that is going as well as
its most fervent apologists tell us it can go: not The Simpsons, more
Little House On The Prairie; not King Lear, more The Darling
Buds of May. Mother and father love each other, care for their
children and look after ageing parents. Where family matters are
concerned they think about things, not as individuals pursuing
their own discrete agendas, but as a couple, an organic unity
speaking in the ﬁrst-person as ‘We’. They recognize their evident
duties, of ﬁdelity to each other, of loving care to their children and
honour to their parents, and fulﬁl them gladly. These duties don’t
pose any evident ethical problem. Ask them why they do things in
this way and they are puzzled. ‘Because we are a family’, they say.
‘What other reason could there be?’ A similar question could be
put to the children. ‘Why do you believe you have a duty to obey
your parents?’ And we expect these respectful children to be
equally stumped.
Then they twig that philosophical questions are being asked:
‘What are the reasons why you accept these duties? Just why do
you think it would be wrong to reject them or fail to fulﬁl them?’
The questioner should realize that she is unlikely to elicit answers
that reveal foundations in the sense of deeper principles from
which the duties concerned can be derived. What is being probed is
the sense of identity of the family members. Seeing themselves as

254

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

parents or children amounts to recognizing the duties incumbent
on them in these roles. Some say duties of this kind constitute the
identity of their bearers – in which case we should not be surprised
at the inarticulacy of those who are questioned or their puzzled
repetition of obvious facts like ‘But I am their parent’, ‘But I am
their child’.
This conception of duties as constitutive of social roles which
persons generally ﬁnd themselves occupying, which they haven’t
chosen to inhabit, receives its most systematic and articulate
philosophical expression in Hegel’s account of ‘Ethical Life’ ( Sittlichkeit) in The Philosophy of Right. In a rational state, individuals will ﬁnd themselves related to other family members in a
speciﬁc kind of domestic structure, working alongside others in an
economy which organizes their relationships with fellow producers and consumers, subject to the rule of law and the disciplines
of regulatory bodies, and living in a political world with a constitution that promotes their freedom and is a focus for their patriotic
sentiments. These nested relationships comprise an ethical home,
complete with a full moral address. The model citizen will just ﬁnd
that, being describable as John Smith, son of Arthur and Margaret, husband of Annie and father of Katy and Helen, colleague of
Jones and client of Microsoft, member of the Association of
University Lecturers, inspected regularly by the Quality in
Teaching Agency (QUIT), member of the Freedom for Old Labour
Democracy Party (FOLD), and citizen of the UK, he has duties
galore!
Duties of these sorts, some that John selected, some that he was
born with and some that have just grown, emerge out of every
citizen’s life-story. We have before us the example of the duties of
family life – a soft-hearted version of Hegel’s account. I think it
makes good sense to accept that one who regards himself as a
family member, on the model thus described, may not be able to
question the duties ascribed to him, although he can of course
decide not to comply, to do what he believes to be wrong.
Arguments of this form gain their plausibility from the reader’s
approval of the social arrangements which are being described. It
is important that Hegel believes he is describing the uniquely
rational form of family life, that which best permits humans to
express distinctive elements of their nature. The rules of ethical

255

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

life do not operate as constraints, they liberate persons who would
otherwise be unable to develop, as in family life, their capacities
for long-term commitment to other persons. Marriage thus is not a
ball and chain but an opportunity for persons to grow out of the
bonds of atomized self-concern.23 If the social arrangements which
are described were thought to be inhibiting, as they are for women
under Hegel’s description of their proper social role, then those
who suffer under them could perfectly well challenge the speciﬁcation of their duties. They may not, in fact, do so. They may be
self-deceiving or, more likely, victims of false consciousness,
embracing an ideology which limits rather than promotes their
personal growth.
Hegel believes that he has explained the rationality of the
institutions which constitute the modern state. He has traced their
history and can explain how they meet the aspirations which mankind has learned to articulate as they have thrown over the institutions which crippled them. The different dimensions of social life,
domestic, economic, legal and political, ﬁt together in a fashion he
described as dialectical but which we can see as coherent, making
it possible to be all these kinds of person at once, to fulﬁl the
duties of one’s various stations without generating social conﬂict
or personal fragmentation. It was also important to him that citizens could recognize the rationality of their condition, although
commentators vary wildly in their assessment of how seriously
Hegel took this requirement. Endorsement must be given but the
reﬂections from which it issues do not permit the possibility of
challenge. But, there again, why should anyone want to challenge
institutions which, in their broad framework at least, cannot be
improved? At the end of history, ‘what is rational is actual; and
what is actual is rational’.24
It follows that there cannot be a problem of political obligation
any more than there can be a problem of terraced housing. Once
we understand the nature of the modern state, interpreting its
distinctive institutions as serving necessary functions given the
desires and values humanity has developed through its history,
once we acknowledge the state’s contribution to our freedom, we
ﬁnd that in describing it, we recognize its legitimacy. Rational
legitimation is, as it were, built into the structure of the moral
world we inhabit.

256

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

There is another, more philosophically parochial, less methodologically explicit, way of making these points which owes something to Wittgenstein. Some claim that our understanding and
endorsement of central elements of our political life is likewise
built into the language we use to talk about them. Such language is
suffused with normativity, with a recognition of the requirements
made on us by the institutions we use such language to describe. If
we know what it means to talk about the state, authority, government and the law, if we can play this particular set of language
games, we can see that asking, ‘Why can’t I break the law?’ is like
asking ‘Why can’t I move a rook along a diagonal?’ whilst playing
chess. Thus T. MacPherson insists that:
‘Why should I obey the government?’ is an absurd question. We
have not understood what it means to be a member of political
society if we suppose that political obligation is something that
we might not have had and that therefore needs to be justiﬁed.25
In similar fashion, Hannah Pitkin argues that:
The same line of reasoning [as that adopted to dispose of the
question ‘Why should I keep a promise?’] can be applied to the
question ‘why does even a legitimate government, a valid law, a
genuine authority ever obligate me to obey?’ As with promises,
and as our new doctrine about political obligation suggests, we
may say that this is what ‘legitimate government’, ‘valid law’,
‘genuine authority’ mean. It is part of the concept, the meaning
of ‘authority’ that those subject to it are required to obey, that it
has a right to command. It is part of the concept, the meaning
of ‘law’, that those to whom it is applicable are obligated to obey
it. As with promises, so with authority, government, and law:
there is a prima facie obligation involved in each, and normally
you must perform it.26
To be rude, we can recognize the Wittgensteinian tenor of the
argument when we hear the sound of the italics. These arguments
derive their plausibility from conceptual connections which are
evident enough: once we modify the nouns with the adjectives
‘legitimate’, ‘valid’ and ‘genuine’, ‘prima facie’ even, there is very

257

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

little room to manoeuvre. (But there is some: couldn’t a legitimate
government or genuine authority get things wrong and make an
unjust law, a law that one is not obligated to obey?) Obligation falls
out of the legitimacy, if, as is plausible, we understand a legitimate
government as generally having the power to impose obligations.
But notice, in the Pitkin quotation in particular, how the adjectives slip out of the argument. As soon as we see that we can properly speak of lousy governments as well as legitimate ones, of
unjust laws as well as valid ones, of spurious authorities as well as
genuine ones (the last with only the slightest whiff of solecism), we
can see how these arguments trade on the assumption that is
explicit in Hegel, viz. that the institutions to which these terms are
applied have already passed the test of rational legitimation. If we
do not make this assumption, then we shall ﬁnd that we do not
judge that ‘it is part of the concept, the meaning of “law” that
those to whom it is applicable are obligated to obey it’.
The implication of Kant’s quotation is that we are never so
engulfed or encumbered by an institution that we cannot step back
from it, detach ourself from its embrace and adopt a perspective
from which we can examine its credentials, asking whether this is
the best way to live. Whether or not we can do so is, I believe, an
empirical question. With respect to any given institution, some
may be able to do so, others not. Some, in philosophical mood, may
attempt to justify, for example, the requirement that they care for
their children and ﬁnd that there is no answer that they can come
up with that is as certain as the conviction that this is just the
right thing to do. Nonetheless, although the search for foundations
or an accommodating reﬂective equilibrium may turn out to be
fruitless, it is important that we see the necessity of making an
attempt. There is no duty so sharp and clear, so inherently
indisputable, that we don’t ﬁnd, or ﬁnd reports of, people who just
don’t see it. However conﬁdent we might be in our own case that
we see things right, we are likely to ﬁnd, dialectically, that we need
something in the way of an argument to support our views in order
to shift the moral perspective of those who get these things wrong.
We tend to believe that what is beyond the pale of decency is
beyond the reach of argument. But to ask, rhetorically, ‘Do I need
to be able to demonstrate the wrongness of sexual relations with
infants?’ is to give up on the task of educating the moral sens-

258

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

ibilities of those who, as a matter of fact, do not recognize their
wrong-doing. It is also to give up on the task of defending one’s
certainties against the challenge of wilful objectors, and also,
probably least important, to fail to acknowledge the possibility of
conscientious error on one’s own part.
The ethical perspective of those I have dubbed ‘communitarians’27 is blinkered in this fashion. There are two things that are
odd about this position: in the ﬁrst place it has been used by conservatives to challenge the impertinent, inherently questioning
stance of modern liberal individualism. But as Kant (and Hegel)
recognized, this sceptical perspective on the claims of authority is
distinctive of the contemporary mind-set.28 Now there are postmodernist philosophers who repudiate the enterprise of rational
legitimation as a defunct because discredited element of the
‘Enlightenment Project’. The task should be banished along with
the associated acceptance of science and belief in human progress. But it is difﬁcult for the conservative to ally himself with
this style of argument, since the obstinate questioning attitude
that Kant celebrated is part of our intellectual inheritance. It
should by now be sanctiﬁed as a well-entrenched and unrenounceable element of our traditional beliefs. Its corollary sin, intellectual forelock tugging in the face of monarch, priest or professor,
is as disreputable as pre-Copernican cosmology. Bluntly, the conservative cannot shout at those who raise questions about the
legitimacy of institutions that it is impossible for these questions
to be intelligibly put. ‘Who are you to challenge the state or the
family?’ carries no rhetorical weight because it is likely to get a
sensible positive response, namely, ‘I am one who has been brought
up in a society with a philosophical and political tradition of
raising such questions and attempting to ﬁnd an answer’.
When applied to the question of political obligation, the second
oddity of this approach is that its proponents write as though the
anarchist had never lived, had never written, could not even be a
ﬁgment of a lively philosophical imagination. Imagine Godwin,
Proudhon, Bakunin or Kropotkin reading the texts I quoted above.
They would roar with laughter and then rage louder in their
pamphlets. They would invent new words to describe the political
institutions they detested (or put the old ones in inverted commas)
and invite their opponents to describe the grammar of their fresh

259

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

coinage. Reluctantly, I abandoned serious investigation of the
anarchists’ claims by reciting the sort of ‘common-sensical’ wisdom about the rationality of trusting ourselves and others at
which any anarchist worth their salt would scoff. Mea culpa. But
in a spirit of half-hearted apology, I insist that the anarchist position cannot be defeated by reading him a few lessons in how
treacherous fellow travellers like me (not to say, zealots for
the state) actually speak. Between the two extreme positions, of
rejecting the state and all its works on the one hand, and wondering what all the philosophical fuss is about on the other, I think
there are good questions to be asked. So let us proceed.

Consent and contract
In the Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, Rousseau asks himself what could have been the origin of the state, how could such a
social condition have originated? A good question, one might
think, given the formidable coercive powers of the state. But the
context in which Rousseau poses the question – a conjectural history of the human race, adducing no ‘facts’ and speculation running riot – might lead one to believe that the question is silly. Who
knows when politics was invented, which was the ﬁrst state and
why people accepted it, if they did? Who cares? Rousseau’s history
of the world in thirty pages is not intended as a crib for the historically challenged. It is a document written with a strong ethical
purpose – to establish a benchmark description of human nature
which enables us to chart the measure of human degradation, as
revealed, in particular, by the development of structures of
inequality.
When Rousseau reaches the point where he supposes political
institutions must have developed, he makes two striking claims.
First, he argues that to be accepted as legitimate, all those subject
to the authority of the constituted sovereign must have consented
to its institution. Arguing in a fashion that he will later reproduce
in the opening chapters of The Social Contract, he concludes that
legitimate authority could not have originated in exercises of
force, since no rational person would accept that might is right,
that the exercise of arbitrary power carries its own legitimizing

260

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

credentials. Prudence might dictate compliance, but grudging,
enforced compliance does not amount to a recognition of authority. Nor should the legitimate exercise of sovereign power be
thought to derive from any natural properties of those who claim
it. The only natural relationships which confer authority occur
within the family and Rousseau summarizes a whole tradition
refuting the application of this model to political life when he says
that ‘instead of saying that civil society is derived from paternal
authority, we ought to say rather that the latter derives its principal force from the former’.29 A process of argument from elimination leads him to endorse the ‘common opinion’ that regards ‘the
establishment of the political body as a real contract between the
people and the chiefs chosen by them’.30 Second, since the contract
was evidently between unequal parties, establishing political
inequalities on top of structures of economic inequality, entrenching and exacerbating what are already conditions of injustice, the
‘real contract’ must have been a fraud.
What is interesting here is Rousseau’s appropriation of what he
takes to be common opinion. ‘We’re all contract theorists nowadays’, he seems to be saying. We should look carefully at this
tradition of argument and tease out the complexities.
Contract arguments trade on the more fundamental notion of
consent. If you and I contract (or covenant – that is the term
Hobbes uses) we are voluntary parties to an agreement we have set
up to bind us. I want the coal and you want the business. We agree
that you will deliver it and I shall pay the bill. The transaction is
consensual and both of us are bound by it. This model represents
the primitive beginnings of dense and ﬁnely articulated structures
of morality and, most importantly, law, whereby conditions and
qualiﬁcations galore are written up and spread over library
shelves. At the heart of such institutions is the thought that things
that are otherwise painful, your loss of the coal, my loss of the
money in payment, are transformed into states of affairs which are,
on balance, preferable to the status quo ante the transaction. Consent (suitably qualiﬁed – we suppose it to be uncoerced, fully
informed, rationally judged and generally not in pursuit of an
immoral objective) is the miracle ingredient which transforms
what would otherwise be a violation of rights into a legitimate
performance. Consent marks a crucial difference between

261

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

legitimate sexual intercourse and rape, between my proper use of
your car and theft, between slavery and hired labour, just as it
marks the beginnings of ethical debate in these areas about what
can be counted as proper, legitimizing agreement.
The state has its laws, its police, courts and prisons. It certainly
looks nasty and in dire need of legitimization. Here, too, consent is
the miracle ingredient. If it can be shown that citizens consent to
it, that’s that – the task of legitimization has been accomplished. I
can’t see any challenge to this argument.
I can see plenty of challenges to its application. The anarchist
may say that the act of submission to a political sovereign is so
harmful as to be irrational, just as Rousseau, following Locke and
arguing against Grotius, insisted that voluntary slavery is inherently irrational. Suppose the anarchist is right. The conclusion we
are invited to draw strikes at a crucial premiss in the statement of
a contract argument, suggesting that, whatever persons say or do,
if submission is irrational then their actions do not amount to
rational, fully informed agreement. Such arguments do not attack
the conditional judgement: if citizens consent to obey, they have
an obligation to do so. They attack the assertion of a minor
premiss to the effect that citizens do so consent. In the same way,
the radical feminist who claims that marital intercourse is rape, is
challenging the view that marriage vows or any permission subsequent to them can be taken to express rational consent.
So far as the form of the argument goes, consent arguments are
unimpugnable: if x consents to y then x is obliged to accept y. X
does so consent. Therefore x is obliged to accept y. Consent arguments are good arguments, which is why they are so familiar. In
political philosophy, contract arguments are a generalization of
them, preparatory to a conclusion that all parties consent to the
established dispensation of power. Having claimed that consent
arguments are good arguments, and having explained their general force and attractiveness, their status as ‘common opinion’ in
Rousseau’s terms, I want to insist that all the crucial issues concern their usefulness since it is an open question whether or not
they may be successfully applied. We should think of the dialectic
as working in this fashion: we all agree that consent entails obligation. The state then attempts to impute consent on the part of its
citizens, recognizing that obligation will follow. Citizens then

262

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

examine the imputation, hence testing whether they are indeed
subject to the obligation which the state asserts. The state is
resourceful. It advances a range of different claims in support of
its imputation of consent. Let us look at these in sequence.
Original contracts
Rousseau’s argument in the Discourse on the Origin of Inequality
cites an historical (but fraudulent) contract between the people
and the chiefs as the origin of government. Other models are available. In Leviathan, Hobbes describes the citizens covenanting with
each other to accept the rule of whoever the majority of them
authorize in a future election.31 Locke concurs. Free men unanimously agree to form a civil society, community, government or
body politic,32 which then entrusts power to whatever form of government they see ﬁt. Suppose each of these authors is relating the
facts of the matter as they see or conjecture them to have been.33
Would such a contract support an obligation to obey the
authorized sovereign? Evidently it would. Is this argument useful?
Everything depends on whether or not there ever was such a
contract.
When Locke was writing. many clearly believed that such a contract was in place, at least in the version where the sovereign contracts with the people. Following the ﬂight of King James VII of
Scotland and II of England in 1688, Parliament resolved that ‘having endeavoured to subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by
breaking the original contract between King and people . . .’ he
had de facto abdicated. Locating the original contract and specifying its content was a cottage industry amongst the students of the
‘Ancient Constitution’. The quest was hopeless. Nonetheless it is a
familiar aspect of modern political practice that new constitutions
or striking constitutional innovations are put to the people in a
referendum so that the ensuing settlement can be recognized as
legitimate. De Gaulle’s Fifth Republic was instituted by referendum in 1958 and modiﬁed, again following a referendum, in 1962.
Following the downfall of the Communist regimes, referendums
proposing draft constitutions were held throughout Eastern
Europe. Britain’s membership of the EEC was endorsed by a

263

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

referendum in 1975 and a devolved parliament in Scotland was
established following a referendum in 1998.
Such modern constitutional settlements differ in detail from the
sketchy accounts found in the classics. The condition of unanimity
at the ﬁrst stage (again supposing these texts are offering descriptions) is not met. But they are sufﬁciently like the historical contracts for similar conclusions to be drawn. If the state, as it
addresses its citizens in the appeal for obedience can point to
something akin to an original contractual settlement, it has made
a good start. Of course, there will be many qualiﬁcations, and some
of these will emerge later when we ask how far the citizen’s participation in democratic politics can be taken as consent. But for
the moment we can accept that those who participate in the institution of government have the responsibility of contractors to
accept the legitimacy of institutions they have endorsed. The consent argument can properly be applied in such circumstances to
those who may fairly be described as contractors.
That said, it should be equally obvious that there are many
regimes wherein such considerations do not apply. There may have
been no constitutional settlement put up for popular approval, or
there may have been one, but many present citizens have not been
party to it. So far as it is the contract (or referendum) which is
adduced as the occasion of consent, those who were not party to it
cannot be held to be obliged to accept the outcome. The state
must come up with other arguments if it is to establish that
non-contractors have obligations.
Express consent
To consent expressly is to put one’s name on the dotted line or
otherwise publicly avow that one accepts some state of affairs.
Married couples standardly consent twice over, ﬁrst in reciting
their vows, next in signing a register. Does anything work like that
in the political realm? Some take explicit vows of allegiance –
these may well be ofﬁce-holders in the state, whose commitment to
the speciﬁc duties of their ofﬁce is assumed within an avowal of
wide scope. And some countries go in for this sort of thing more
than others, reciting ‘I pledge allegiance . . .’ and so on, at the drop

264

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

of a hat. Naturalization ceremonies constitute a public afﬁrmation; in the UK, respecting traditions of modesty and reticence,
aspirant citizens merely sign the appropriate form.
There can be no doubt that those who actively afﬁrm citizenship
in this fashion (supposing their actions to be rational, fully
informed, uncoerced etc. . . .) have accepted an obligation, have
undertaken the duties of the citizen. It is worth noting however
that exactly what duties they have undertaken may be moot. The
only time I have been called upon to give advice on the strength of
my profession as a philosopher was when a student who had
arrived at the ﬁnal stage of the naturalization process – signing the
papers – asked me if he could do so in good conscience. His problem was that the declaration he was invited to make required him
to recognize the authority of ‘Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and
all the descendants begat therein’ (I quote from memory). He was
troubled because he couldn’t accept the principle of monarchy, not
even the impotent, symbolic, soap-opera variety. Believing my disingenuousness to be sanctioned by the faint sniff of a philosophical problem lurking hereabouts, I told him not to worry. He
could sign up in good faith since accepting a monarchical principle is not a duty of citizenship. Good British citizens can and do
campaign for the abolition of the monarchy.
The moral of this story, and it applies to original contract arguments too, is that it is not obvious or uncontroversial what the
duties of the citizen include, even when these may fairly be judged
to be the upshot of express consent, for it is not clear what even
those who expressly consent, actually consent to. This is worth
stating because the state is greedy when it tracks down its citizens’
obligations and is likely to assume that, if the citizen can fairly be
deemed to accept any duty, she must accept the lot, capaciously
and optimistically speciﬁed. Even those who accept the duties
entailed by their express consent, should take a cautious, if not
quite sceptical approach to detailed speciﬁcations. The state
drafts the terms of the agreement and is a master of the small
print, not to say the unspoken implications and the traditional
understandings.
All that said again, the limitations on the applicability of this
argument are obvious. I haven’t expressed any such consent, nor
have many of my fellow citizens. Nor should we be expected to

265

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

welcome the open solicitation of such consent. Oaths of allegiance, unless they are the procedures of states which solicit the
enthusiasm of the new recruit, are suspect, a familiar stratagem of
tough states which invite martyrdom or self-imposed exile as the
optimum way of dealing with inconvenient but conscientious dissenters. The state has widened its net and trawled in more obliging
citizens. But the net evidently needs to be widened further. It looks
to adduce tacit consent.
Tacit consent
To begin with, we need a clear example of tacit consent. What we
are looking for is an example of behaviour which noncontroversially assumes an obligation which does not derive from a
contract or an explicit act of consent, behaviour which nonetheless may be said to express consent. Suppose I see, unexpectedly, a
group of my students in a bar and join them at their invitation. I
am lucky, and as soon as I sit down, one of them announces that it
is her round and she buys us all drinks. The rounds continue and I
take a drink each time one is offered. When my turn comes around,
I say ‘Thank you very much for your kindness. I’ve enjoyed your
company. I have to be off’ and leave. Have I done wrong? Of course I
have. I’ve broken the rules. What rules?
The demand that the rules be speciﬁed, were anyone to make it
in these circumstances, would be impertinent. My behaviour is not
acceptable. I cannot say that there aren’t any rules, nor that the
rules aren’t clear. The rules which govern our behaviour in circumstances of the sort that I have described are not explicit in the
sense of being written down in the deﬁnitive ﬁeld guide to social
conformity. There are no explicit prescriptions that I know of
which should govern one’s response. It’s just that I know, or,
stretching the point that innocence demands of incredulity, should
know, that I have undertaken an obligation to reciprocate my students’ generosity. I have tacitly consented to the practice whereby
the company buys a round of drinks in turn.
In the modern literature on political obligation the philosopher
who brought tacit consent to the forefront of discussion was John
Locke. Locke asks exactly the right question. Granted that one

266

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

who consents to government acquires an obligation to obey, and
granted a fortiori that tacit consent is consent,
the difﬁculty is, what ought to be look’d upon as a tacit Consent,
and how far it binds, i.e. how far anyone shall be looked on to
have consented and thereby submitted to any government,
where he has made no Expression of it at all.34
Scholars of Locke have distinguished two strands in his answer to
this question. First, tacit consent is witnessed in the enjoyment or
possession of land which is under the dominion of the government.
In the background is the supposition that all property within a
territory is susceptible to the law of the land for only thus could
citizens enjoy their property in security. Hence the convention
that underlies the attribution of consent is that property holders
submit to the government that regulates property to their advantage. This convention we must take it is as well understood as the
rule of boozers’ etiquette which requires that rounds of drinks be
purchased in turn. If Locke is right, the state can present its bill to
those who enjoy property, even to those who are ‘barely travelling
freely on the Highway’ and demand of them obedience as the
proper duty of the citizen (or transient alien).
The second line of argument is derived as a qualiﬁcation of this
ﬁrst. Since ‘The Obligation that anyone is under, by Virtue of such
Enjoyment, to submit to the Government, begins and ends with the
Enjoyment’,35 one who sells up and leaves can quit the obligation.
There is a particular opportunity for explicit dissent, so one may
suppose that those who do not take it tacitly consent. Thus the
state may extend its reach even further, attributing consent
and the duties entailed by it to those who choose to stay and,
presumably, continue to enjoy the beneﬁts of secure possession.
Are these arguments persuasive? In considering the ﬁrst, we
should recognize that everything depends upon the existence of
the convention that Locke describes. Clearly, if there is such a
convention in place and if everyone understands and accepts it,
then we may fairly judge that those to whom it applies have
the consequent obligation. If there is a rule or convention of the
Common Room that those who take a cup of coffee pay 50p into the
kitty, then those who enjoy the provision are obliged to pay. In

267

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

similar fashion, we need to investigate whether there is such a rule
binding those who accept the beneﬁts of the state. If there is,
Locke’s judgement is correct, but if there isn’t any such convention, or if its existence is a matter of genuine dispute, then the
state is not entitled to claim obedience.
This point may seem obvious – indeed it is obvious – but it is
worth making since it alerts us to an equivocation in the argumentative strategy employed by the state. As represented by Locke,
it looks as though the state is arguing two points at once, claiming
both that if there is such a convention then obligations follow, and
further, that there is in fact such a convention and citizens should
recognize in consequence their proper duties. Of course, it is perfectly open to the state to advance both of these claims. The ﬁrst
thesis is conceptual and, I think, should be readily accepted. The
second thesis, by contrast, states a matter of fact concerning the
existence of a norm or moral rule and this is contentious. As we
have seen, there are anarchists in the ﬁeld, and they will deny it.
We shall return to this question later when we consider the implications for political obligation of the fact that citizens are in
receipt of beneﬁts. It may be that one can argue for a different
conclusion: that those who accept the beneﬁts of the state ought to
accept the duties of citizenship, even if, as a matter of fact, they do
not. They ought to recognize such a convention, even if as things
stand there is no such convention to presently bind them.
A second oddity about this argument deserves notice and it was
brought to prominence by Hume.36 Suppose there is a rule in a
particular society that those who receive beneﬁts from the state
incur the duties of the citizen. There are many reasons why such a
rule may carry conviction. Some may claim that each citizen ﬁnds
such a rule to be in their best interest, others may say, in utilitarian fashion, that observance of such a rule maximizes the wellbeing of citizens, and there are plenty more arguments in the
ofﬁng. But once such a rule is recognized as bearing on citizens’
obligations, why should one take the further step of claiming that
the acceptance of beneﬁts witnesses consent, albeit tacit? If the
rule is in place, and if a citizen does accept the beneﬁts, does not
that, on its own, establish the fact of the citizens’ obligations without one’s having to establish the further or entailed fact of their
tacit consent?

268

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

If we return to the example of boozer’s etiquette, we see that a
crucial feature of it was that the person who incurred the obligation freely accepted the drinks in full knowledge of the rule of
reciprocity which operates in pubs. He need not have accepted the
drinks or he could have accepted a drink after having given an
explanation that he would be unable to reciprocate. These precautions would have discharged any obligation on him to pay for a
round. It is the fact that these choices are, and are known to be,
open to him that makes it reasonable to speak of consent of the
tacit variety. It is not obvious that such conditions operate in
the case of the state, which standardly does not present us with the
option of not taking up the goods and remaining a free agent.
Many of the beneﬁts touted, good maternity care, the cod liver oil
and the orange juice, free educational provision, are dumped at the
door of the unwitting recipient. Many of the rounds of drinks will
have been bought before the child becomes an adult and is
expected to pay.
Nonetheless, there is something to this argument. If someone
feels that they have accepted beneﬁts from the state believing that
this brings with it an obligation to obey, they may fairly judge
themselves to have consented to the regime. Some who accept this
argument may make every effort to dissociate themselves from the
beneﬁts, detaching themselves physically from the state which
provides them. They may exile themselves to the wilds of Montana
or Idaho, living a life which is self-sufﬁcient apart from periodic
trips to the local riﬂe store. This is Militia Man, the bane of all
theories of political obligation. Whatever grounds may be cited in
favour of his consent he will disavow sincerely – which is not to say
that all other arguments that can be adduced in favour of his
having the duties of the citizen must fail.
This example requires us to examine the second mark of tacit
consent, viz. the lack of explicit dissent. Again, as with the
example of the pub, one can think of circumstances wherein
the lack of explicit dissent can fairly be taken to witness assent. If
the woman in charge of the meeting asks us if we have any objections to register against her proposal and we remain silent, our
silence, we should think, testiﬁes explicitly to our consent for all
that it is tacit. This is a useful convention which expedites the
business of committees, though it opens the door to a lot of

269

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

hypocrisy and self-deception when a subsequent account of one’s
conduct is called for. We know when politicians ominously write in
their diaries, ‘I remained silent’ that something is up. The space
created for disingenuous strategies alerts us to the fact of an
unwritten convention in the background. Can such a convention
be attested in the case of the citizen’s duties?
Again it might be. A citizen may feel compromised by her
unwillingness to dissent when an opportunity for dissent was
available and judge that her silence has implicated her in the policies in which she acquiesced. This is a duty of citizens which often
goes unnoticed, but passive citizenship as well as active participation can require that one has a duty to take some responsibility for
the actions of the government. As with the acceptance of beneﬁts,
the fact of the citizen’s not expressly dissenting can serve to attest
consent and ground consequent obligations.
But remember: both of these arguments, authoritative when
rehearsed by citizens, can be spoken in the voice of the government and in this context, they may carry little conviction. They
will carry no conviction where dissent is costly to the citizen,
exposing them to risks of harm. The state that pursues dissenters
efﬁciently cannot cite the lack of dissent in support of its legitimacy. Locke had in mind, as an occasion of express dissent, the
citizen’s opportunity, ‘by Donation, Sale or otherwise, [to] quit the
said Possession’, to leave the country, perhaps along with other
dissenters, founding a new society in empty lands.37 The state may
echo this judgement, telling us that our continuing presence
marks our tacit consent. Such a claim deserves Hume’s mocking
response:
Can we seriously say that a poor peasant or artisan has a free
choice to leave his country, when he knows no foreign language
or manners, and lives, from day to day, by the small wages which
he acquires? We may as well assert that a man, by remaining in a
vessel, freely consents to the dominion of the master; though he
was carried on board while asleep, and must leap into the ocean
and perish, the moment he leaves her.38
Hume’s strictures are just, but there is a rider to the dialectic
which he did not acknowledge. There have been plenty of cases

270

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

where citizens have possessed the resources to emigrate and have
identiﬁed a state which would welcome them, a state they, too,
would welcome as inﬁnitely better than the one they want to quit,
and yet they have not been permitted to emigrate, or else the
process of emigration has been made hazardous, overcostly or
humiliating. One thinks of the predicament of Jews in the former
Soviet Union. This episode makes it clear that states which frustrate their citizens’ wishes to emigrate cannot attribute to such
citizens a tacit consent deriving from their continuing residence.
Nor can it use such an argument in the case of citizens who do not
wish to leave. That these conclusions are obvious shows that the
argument for tacit consent from the lack of explicit dissent
need not be as crude as it is in Locke’s statement, nor quite as
vulnerable as Hume’s counterexample suggests.
Arguments from tacit consent, in these familiar forms, do apply
to some. The state has widened its net yet again and caught some
more citizens in it. But there will still remain plenty of citizens
who can, in good faith, reject its imputation. So the state seeks out
further arguments.
Quasi-consent
In Democracy and Disobedience, Peter Singer discusses the speciﬁc
question of whether citizens of a democratic state have particular
reasons to accept the duties of the citizen as determined by majority rule. Thus far, we have spoken of the state and ignored the
nature of its constitution. We could have been discussing any old
state. The only question in hand was whether the citizens actually
consented through the mechanisms of original contract, express
or tacit consent. Singer introduces the notion of quasi-consent to
explain the distinctive form of not-quite-consent which is implicit
in the behaviour of voters. Their behaviour, he believes, mimics
consent. They act as if they consent and the same normative conclusions may be drawn from their behaviour as are drawn in the
case of actual consent.39 If we describe the action of voting, taking
the polling card and handing it over to the polling ofﬁcer,
receiving a voting slip and crossing the box in a private booth then
placing the voting paper in a ballot box for counting, nothing

271

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

amounts to express consent. It would be easy to require valid
papers to include a signature afﬁrming that the voter consents to
abide by the outcome of the ballot. To my knowledge, such a statement is never demanded as a condition of participation. So if
voting attests consent, it is not express consent.
Singer tries to distinguish tacit consent from quasi-consent,
claiming that the attribution of tacit consent, as explained by
Locke (or some of his prominent interpreters), supposes that citizens actually give it – if not expressly, then ‘as saying in their
heart’ that they consent, as acknowledging at the moment that
they act in the manner from which consent can be inferred that
they do so willingly.40 The phenomenon of quasi-consent, by contrast, attests the implications of voting behaviour, speciﬁcally that
citizens should accept that their participation in the voting process requires them to abide by the majority result, whether or not
they realize that this is what they have committed themselves to. I
don’t see the difference. If one had ﬂown in from Mars and had
been entertained by a group of hospitable students, if one was
truly ignorant of the ruling conventions of pub visiting, tacit consent could fairly be repudiated. The only points at issue are: (i) is
there a rule in place governing everyone’s behaviour; (ii) did the
Martian or the guest know the rule; and (iii) in case they didn’t,
ought they to have done so? Should the Martian or the lucky
teacher have done their homework before they entered the pub?
Generally, ignorance, as displayed by a ‘No’ answer to (ii), will
excuse, though the excuse stretches the point if the answer to (iii)
is deemed to be ‘Yes’. If we conclude that the beneﬁciary did, or
ought to have, understood the ethical implications of his
behaviour we will judge that he has the same duties as one who
expressly consents.
But this is to prejudge the issue. I endorse Singer’s terminology
of quasi-consent, not because it has a normative structure different from that of tacit consent – it doesn’t – but because it signals a
distinctive argument which ﬁnds application in the speciﬁc context of voters’s behaviour. The quasi-consent the voter attests is
attributable on the basis of a convention which is unique to the
context of democratic decisions. I would have no dispute with the
philosopher who insists that participation in democratic decision
procedures is a third mark of tacit consent. But it is worth insist-

272

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

ing that this mark is distinctive. It is not a case of beneﬁts
accepted or dissent foregone.
The argument for the conclusion that the voter has consented to
abide by the decision taken by the majority elaborates our understanding of the voting process. It articulates what the voters
believe (or ought to be able to work out) that they are doing. Think
of any occasion of voting: for or against a strike by the workers
who are being ballotted, for a representative to serve in a parliament or a local council, for or against a policy proposal put to a
referendum. In every case it is supposed that the majority decision
is binding on all those who take part. This is an assumption that
can be challenged. I have spoken, for example, to some who voted
in a strike ballot and did not accept that they were obliged to
accept the outcome. They thought that, if striking would violate a
personal obligation of service to the university authorities, they
should do everything in their power to prevent others from
striking, which efforts included voting against a strike, whilst not
accepting the outcome should (as happened) the majority decision
go against them. Such are the frustrations of the picket-line at a
university.
In the next chapter I shall have more to say about democracy. For
the moment, all I can say, of what is repeatable, against the voter
who repudiates the majority decision, is that they do not understand the point of the exercise in which they were engaged. In a
reputable democracy, no one has to vote pro or con a particular
policy. Anyone can abstain, or, where ﬁlling in a voting paper is
compulsory, spoil their vote. Perhaps this is an innocent construction of the reality of voting in all regimes in the modern world.
Perhaps those who wish a plague on both their houses will be
found out and persecuted. All one can do, given the many ways
things can go wrong, the many resources of the manipulators of
any decision procedure, is to insist that whatever reasons there
may be for deciding issues by democratic processes should commend themselves to participators. Where these reasons are
acknowledged, those who take part in democratic procedures
should abide by the outcome.
This may not be obvious. Certainly, as we have seen, there is no
rule book which states the convention and those who have the
right to vote do not have to pass a test establishing that they

273

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

understand the ethical implications of voting. There is no way of
making a case for the thesis that voters consent to abide by the
result of the ballot other than by insisting, lamely, that ‘there is a
conceptual connection between voting and consenting’.41 The conceptual connection can be articulated by explaining the point of
the voting process. It is not a method of canvassing opinion, a poll
designed to establish which policy or representative is most
favoured, which information may be taken into account when a
decision is taken. It is, itself, a way of taking a decision. Once the
votes are counted, the decision is made. There is no logical space
for further decision-making of the sort that might provide an
opportunity for demurral between the act of voting and the
announcement of a decision.
We shall see in the next chapter that there are many reasons for
taking decisions in a democratic fashion. We have here
encountered one that is of the utmost importance – that democratic decisions bind those who participate in the making of them
to an acceptance of the result. Where the result is the establishment of a government, voters have assumed the duties of citizenship as these will be deﬁned by the state. Although I cannot think
of any objections to this argument – yet again the state has found a
good one – it should not be thought that it entitles any speciﬁc
regime to claim universal allegiance. The real world is a messy
place and there are many qualiﬁcations that need to be registered.42 Most obviously, since the argument establishes that those
who participate as voters take on the duties of citizenship, this
entails that one clear way of repudiating the obligations is not to
participate. If you don’t want to be bound by a decision to strike,
don’t take part in the ballot.
This limits the scope of the state’s appeal since we can be sure
that some – Militia Men again – will refuse to enter the polling
booth, or entering it, spoil their paper or, indeed, strip off in protest as Jerry Rubin advised voters to do in the 1968 Presidential
Election in the United States.43 But the story gets messier still. If
we are thinking of elections to a representative assembly, the
assembly may have structural ﬂaws which limit the legitimacy of
its decisions. It may represent an entrenched majority, directing
its policies towards the violation of minority rights. It may contravene an explicit mandate, either failing to introduce policies

274

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

announced in the manifesto of the winning party or introducing
policies unannounced at the time of its election. Considerations
such as these reveal that the consent adduced by voting does not
amount to the issue of a blank cheque. The consent will, in practice, be qualiﬁed by further understandings of what it is rational
for the citizen to accept. Some qualiﬁcations, e.g. the requirement
of respect for minority rights, may lead to the withdrawal of all
authority with respect to the state’s decisions. Others, concerning
the detail of the mandate, may lead citizens to challenge the validity of speciﬁc laws. Thus some in the UK who were led to
protest the Tory Poll Tax legislation of 1988 by refusing to pay the
locally raised charge, were willingly to continue paying income
tax.
Having advanced the argument adducing quasi-consent on the
part of voters, the state will ﬁnd that it has gathered in more support for its claim to allegiance, that more citizens will recognize
that the duties of the citizen are incumbent on them or that there
are further grounds for them to acknowledge duties which they
already accept. If it is lucky, the state will ﬁnd that all citizens
have in fact consented to the duties it imposes. If it is scrupulous,
it will make every effort to ensure that citizens are willing to do so.
It should not anticipate this measure of success, since the anarchist, for one, has deep reasons for resisting its charms, and as the
persistence of bloody-minded Militia Man shows, some will do
anything to resist the imputation of consent. If folk don’t actually
consent, whether in an original contract or constitutional settlement, expressly, tacitly or in the manner of voters, their consent
cannot be used to ground their duties.
This result will not satisfy the state, which is ambitious. It will
seek to ﬁnd other grounds for imputing duties to its recalcitrant
citizens, other reasons for bolstering the allegiance of those who
do consent.44 Perhaps it will seek to establish that those who don’t
consent ought to do so and claim in consequence their hypothetical consent or their partnership in an hypothetical contract.
We shall examine these arguments next.

275

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

Hypothetical consent and hypothetical contract
Dworkin tells us, in a famous quotation, that ‘A hypothetical contract is not simply a pale form of an actual contract; it is no contract at all’.45 This tells us that there is some work to be done in
establishing the credentials of arguments that rely on hypothetical consent or contract. They cannot rely on the normative
implications of actions of consent or contract. Their force must
derive from elsewhere.
Hypothetical consent works like this: hospital patients are generally asked to consent to surgical procedures being carried out on
them. Otherwise, the invasion of their bodies would be an assault.
Yet some patients, notably those who are comatose, cannot give
consent. In such circumstances, it behoves the surgeon to ask a
hypothetical question: would the patient consent were he conscious, rational and fully informed of the nature and likely success
of the proposed operation? Surgeons’ temperaments dispose them
to intervene, to save life or cure illness or advance medical science,
so it is important to see that the answer to the hypothetical question may be ‘No’. The way to answer the hypothetical question is to
gather the sort of information that friends and family can provide
so that the surgeon has as good an idea as is possible of how the
patient would decide. This may be easy – the patient may have clear
religious beliefs which proscribe surgical procedures of the sort
envisaged. Or perhaps the patient has told his family that he does
not wish any more expensive, painful interventions which have
little chance of success. Or perhaps he has told people that he
would grasp at any straw to have a longer life of even meagre quality. Using this sort of information, the surgeon takes the decision
she believes the patient would have reached, substituting her
judgement for his. It is useful to speak of hypothetical consent
here because it signals that the decision is being taken from the
point of view of the patient, mustering the sort of information that
would have been relevant to his decision, were he in a position to
make it. The surgeon, considering what would be best overall, may
well have reached a different decision, taking into account values
such as the advance of medical knowledge or techniques which
may mean little to the patient.
Hypothetical consent, thus construed, looks as though it has

276

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

little part to play in working out whether citizens have duties to
the state. Why should one seek to establish it if there exist mechanisms for ﬁnding out whether or not citizens actually consent?
What kind of information about citizens’ preferences could be a
substitute for that elicited by asking them? The only sort of presumption that could motivate the investigation of hypothetical
consent is that of widespread irrationality. One must assume that
citizens, like the patient, but for different reasons, are incapable of
judging rationally whether or not they have the obligations with
which they are charged by the state. This assumption we should
take to be false. Who would openly acknowledge that it holds for
themselves? Just because we understand so clearly the circumstances which call for the investigation and imputation of hypothetical consent, we should be very reluctant to use this strategy
in seeking to derive citizens’ duties.
Hypothetical contract is a close cousin of hypothetical consent.
As an argument form, it suffers from not having available a simple
example or model which illustrates the domain of its possible
application outside the context of philosophical dispute. Perhaps
some sorts of historical judgement require arguments which
hypothesize a contract. One way of deciding whether or not the
Treaty of Versailles was a good thing, or whether those who
imposed it should be criticized for the harshness of their impositions on Germany in 1919 is to ask whether we would have proposed or accepted its terms. But the ﬁt with hypothetical consent
is imperfect in an important fashion. In the case of the patient, it is
his reasoning we are attempting to reconstruct. In the case of the
Treaty, it is our own judgement that we are seeking to apply in the
circumstances of decision-making available to the original parties.
We can best judge the applicability of an hypothetical contract
by trying to deploy it in the present case. Again we should adopt
the perspective of the ambitious state. We are supposing that it has
failed to establish consent where its attribution matters most, in
the case, that is, of the recalcitrant citizen. If we haven’t established that he does consent, can we show him that he ought to? Can
we get him to accept that he ought to agree to the state’s
imposition of the duties of citizenship although he hasn’t in fact
done so? Can we claim that other things he believes require him to
accept the conclusion he disavows?

277

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

We can take it for granted that accepting the duties of citizenship is costly. The state exacts its impositions. It threatens its
citizens with penalties for non-compliance. As we saw when
discussing the challenge of the anarchist, these powers are
unattractive to anyone in their reach. The hypothetical contract
argument attempts to show that a rational citizen should accept
these powers as legitimate as the price of achieving goods that he
values more. The decisive move is made when the citizen recognizes that he faces a social problem, not a personal dilemma, when
he realizes that an acceptable solution embraces others besides
himself. The simplest way to outline this model of reasoning is to
bowdlerize Hobbes, the master of this line of argument.
First, imagine that we are living without the state, in the state of
nature. We seek to advance our own interests, placing a premium
on the preservation of our lives. Yet we ﬁnd ourselves systematically thwarted. We ﬁnd, each of us as individuals, that our pursuit
of power, both to satisfy our desires and to protect ourselves from
others who seek to use our powers for their own ends, is continually frustrated by the power-seeking activities of others. In the
state of nature, nothing constrains this pursuit of power. Since as
things stand, no one is getting what they want, the circumstances
of human interaction need to be changed. Since the unimpeded
pursuit of our own interests undermines its own achievement, the
rules of the game need to be revised.
There are four possibilities: the ﬁrst, the status quo wherein we
each of us struggle for power, is hopeless. The second possibility is
that I have all the power, but no one else will accept that. The third
option is that someone else has all the power, but that won’t suit
me. The ﬁnal possibility is that no one has power over anybody
else. We can achieve this outcome by all of us renouncing the private pursuit of power, by handing over our powers to some third
party who will establish the conditions of peace. We conclude that
it is rational for agents who wish to preserve their lives under
conditions of commodious living to accept a sovereign power to
rule over them. The result of our several deliberations is that each
of us judges that if we do not have a sovereign we should institute
one; if we do have a sovereign we should keep it, recognizing its
authority.
You will have plenty of reservations about this story. But look at

278

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

the outcome. We have portrayed an exercise of practical reason
undertaken by each party to the conﬂict as giving rise to a mutually acceptable solution. It is not that everyone has agreed with
each other in the way of shaking hands or signing a treaty. The
agreement that has been modelled is agreement in the minimal
sense of congruence in the reasoning undertaken and the conclusion reached. We each reach the same conclusion, since we all
reason in the same fashion from the same premisses. Matters stand
as if we had made a contract. It might be objected that this is a
poor sort of contract. After all, if we are all asked to write down
the answer to the following sum: 2 + 2 = ?, and we all write down 4,
what is gained by representing the agreed answer as the outcome
of a contract? It is as though we had agreed, but what are the
implications of this? We should certainly not conclude that
2 + 2 = 4 on the basis of a hypothetical contract.
This objection forgets a central feature of the story. Unlike the
mathematical case, as each person reviewed the possible outcomes,
they were forced to consider the responses of others and
restructure their priorities in line with their judgements of what
outcome others could reasonably be expected to accept. Each person conducted the moral arithmetic separately, but each person
found themselves having to take into account the anticipated
responses of others. The ﬁrst preference of each, that he or she has
all the power, could not survive the obvious thought that this
would not be acceptable to others. So each ‘contractor’ trimmed
their aspirations, seeking only solutions that would be mutually
agreeable. A hypothetical contract works as a device for modelling
the practical reason of individual agents seeking an answer to a
common problem where it is a condition of the acceptability of a
solution that everyone agrees to it because agreement is the only
way forward.
I ﬁnd this model of reasoning explicit in Hobbes, implicit in
Locke, and both implicit (in The Discourse on the Origins of
Inequality ) and explicit (in The Social Contract ) in Rousseau – but
I shan’t defend these attributions here. It remains to be seen how
far it amounts to a cogent argument in favour of sovereign authority and the citizens’ duty to accept it. One implication of the use of
this argument form should be made explicit. I mentioned earlier
that there was something objectionable about the application of a

279

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

hypothetical consent argument to settle the question of political
obligation. It seemed to presuppose that citizens cannot work out
for themselves whether they have the obligations of citizens, that
they are treated as irrational when arguments were imputed to
them which they would likely reject. The hypothetical contract
argument does not carry this implication. On the other hand it
must accommodate the inconvenient fact that persons may be
ignorant of the values and preferences of other persons, or that
they may discount these in their reasonings, and thereby may be
unable, in so far as they fail to take these things into account, of
reaching a solution to problems which they throw up for themselves. The hypothetical contract model articulates an ideal process of reasoning. Moral ignorance or short-sightedness, if not
straightforward irrationality, makes application of the model
necessary in circumstances where we cannot expect those to whom
it applies to respect either its premisses or its conclusions.
In particular, it represents a democratic sovereign as a fair compromise between conﬂicting claims to power. We can test this
thought by seeing how such an argument applies to Militia Man.
Note that although he has withdrawn to the wilds of Montana or
wherever, he hasn’t succeded in inoculating himself from the contagion of other members of his society. He still makes claims
against them, notably that they keep off his land, and reinforces
these by threatening to use his automatic riﬂe. He makes a claim
even in this restricted domain, so it is important to work out how it
might be adjudicated when it comes into conﬂict with the claims of
others. If he is wise, he will not rely on physical force or weaponry.
An alliance of rival claimants will get him sooner or later, as
Hobbes foresaw. He can’t insist that he isn’t a threat. His neighbours will worry that he may take pot-shots at straying cattle or
children. Whatever his antecedent principles about big government and the like, he should realize that he has to make an
accommodation, which amounts to accepting a procedure for the
arbitration of conﬂicting claims. He has to do this because otherwise everything he holds dear is threatened. The state puts itself
forward to recalcitrants such as Militia Man as adjudicator of
disputes and enforcer of valid claims. Hobbes would accept any
third party as long as it can settle disputes effectively. Just in case
Militia Man distrusts the state, it can offer him a place in the

280

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

making of rules and the settling of claims as a participant in democratic decision procedures. He would do well to accept the offer, but
if he doesn’t its terms may fairly be imposed upon him anyway.46
In explaining the notion of hypothetical consent, I have done
little more than elaborate an argument form and illustrate its use
in sketchy fashion. Despite its ancient provenance, of all the classical arguments underpinning political obligation it is the most
underdeveloped in the kind of detail it requires. It looks to be
vulnerable at two speciﬁc points: the ﬁrst concerns its Hobbesian
antecedents. It assumes an ambitious theory of human nature, a
universalist psychology. Hobbes’s own version, stressing selfinterest, is unattractive, but these can fairly be seen as weak,
rather than strong premisses. We may be concerned with many
other goods than self-interest, but if our lives are at stake one
interest is indubitably threatened, an interest that cannot be compromised without all other interests being sacriﬁced too. The Militia Man may say, ‘Give me liberty or give me death’, but this is
better understood as an appeal against colonial tyranny rather
than the modern bureaucratic state’s practice of sending out
income tax forms. It is odd that one who willingly pays purchase
tax in order to buy a riﬂe should genuinely think martyrdom a
rational alternative to the payment of other taxes. Stronger versions of the grounding premiss offer greater hostages to fortune,
but may succeed in deﬂecting objections. Locke identiﬁes life, liberty and property as the goods which we require a state to protect.
Rousseau would have us recognize as legitimate a state that protects our life and property under conditions of maximal liberty
and equality, assuming that were we not vulnerable in respect of
these goods there would be no point in a political association.
Since these premisses amount to empirical claims at least in so
far as they attest universal desires and values, they are clearly
vulnerable. Nonetheless it is hard to ﬁnd spokesmen for opposing
positions. I can imagine religious opinions to the effect that these
things do not really matter. In the order of things, they count for
little against the purity of the soul and the promise of salvation.
Such views generally preface an argument for theocracy rather
than a religiously motivated propagation of anarchy. Still, I guess
it is a distinctive position. We have seen cult members dying on
television rather than accept state regulation of their weaponry.

281

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

This should alert us to the second vulnerable aspect of the hypothetical consent argument. It requires us to accept that the goods
that we value cannot be protected or promoted without the state; it
requires a denial of the anarchist claim that the state as we have
encountered it, or as any political utopia is likely to develop, will
ultimately threaten the things we most value. This, too, is at bottom
an empirical claim, so I shall leave adjudication of it to the reader.

The benefits of good government
The arguments from consent or contract that we have been examining have claimed either that we do or have contracted or consented to the duties of citizenship or, in the case of hypothetical
contract, that we ought to accept the duties of citizenship. In the
case of actual consent, it is strictly speaking irrelevant why we
consent. That we express marriage vows binds us to our partners.
Why we do so is immaterial to the reality of our obligations – and
the same must be true of the duties of citizenship. Nonetheless, we
can expect a state which wishes to elicit our consent to give us
grounds for doing so, and the obvious way for it to proceed is for it
to provide us with beneﬁts. As we have seen, there may well be
circumstances in which our willing receipt of beneﬁts is an index
of tacit consent, although the supply of beneﬁts is not, of itself, a
reason for imputing it. Arguments which employ the notion of
hypothetical consent also rely on the state delivering the goods.
The strategy which underlies the argument is an exploration of the
claim that the costs of obedience are the price a rational agent will
pay to receive the beneﬁts of others’ compliance. In plausible versions of each of these arguments we reach the conclusion that we
ought to accept the duties of citizenship through attesting consent
as a result of an examination of the beneﬁts we shall attain. This
makes good sense. Why should anyone consent to the imposition of
duties unless they expect to beneﬁt? Why should anyone contract
with others to limit their liberty unless their interests are
advanced or their values promoted by so doing?
It is worth stopping at this point, though, to reconsider the force
of Hume’s question. Why seek out or presume consent when the
beneﬁts of government are apparent? Doesn’t the fact of universal

282

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

advantage itself constitute good reason for us to accept the duties
of citizenship without taking the unnecessary circuit of attesting
consent? It might, as we shall see, but if in fact consent is elicited
or contracts undertaken that is an important fact which the state
can be expected to emphasize. In the case of hypothetical contract,
there is no contract to be attested. As I have emphasized before,
consent arguments are perfectly acceptable. We can expect those
who have consented to recognize their force. But some will not
consent. They will not expressly consent or be party to anything
that resembles a contract. As soon as they suspect that tacit consent may be presumed, they will act differently or explicitly
repudiate the imputation. They will not vote or otherwise participate in democratic decision procedures. And they will challenge
the applicability of premisses employed to derive hypothetical
contracts.
Does the state have further arguments at its disposal? Yes it
does. Both of the further arguments we shall consider proceed
directly from the supposition that the state beneﬁts its citizens, in
the manner Hume thought sensible. In what follows, I shall assume
that Hume was right on the matter of fact. If he wasn’t, the arguments that follow have no purchase. This qualiﬁcation is of more
than academic importance, however, to the state that wishes to
claim our allegiance and the citizen who wishes to appraise its
claims. It requires that the state which presses our obligations to it
should demonstrate how the citizens’ advantage is served. It places
a burden of proof on the state which accords with the instincts of
liberalism.
The principle of fairness
This argument states that considerations of fairness require those
in receipt of beneﬁts from the state to reciprocate by accepting the
appropriate burdens, by accepting the duties of citizenship. In
modern times it was ﬁrst sketched by H.L.A. Hart:
When a number of persons conduct any joint enterprise according to rules and thus restrict their liberty, those who have
submitted to these restrictions when required have the right to

283

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

a similar submission from those who have beneﬁtted from their
submission.
The argument was further developed by Rawls in his 1964 paper,
‘Legal Obligation and the Duty of Fair Play’. It was mauled by
Nozick in Anarchy, State and Utopia. It was reported, expanded,
defended and ultimately dismissed by Simmons in Moral Principles
and Political Obligations and it has been reviviﬁed, developed and
endorsed by Klosko in The Principle of Fairness and Political
Obligation.47 Hart is clear that this account of the grounding of
political obligation should be sharply distinguished from those
that derive obligation from consent or promises. If the argument
works, it has the same power as the argument from hypothetical
consent (of which it may be presented as an elaboration) to attribute obligations to those who expressly disavow consent. That said,
there is a very real difﬁculty in distinguishing cases where the
argument applies from obvious cases of tacit consent. To see this,
consider Robert Nozick’s well-known objection:
Suppose some of the people in your neighbourhood (there are
364 other adults) have found a public address system and decide
to institute a system of public entertainment. They post a list of
names, one for each day, yours among them. On his assigned day
(one can easily switch days) a person is to run the public address
system, play records over it, give news bulletins, tell amusing
stories he has heard, and so on. After 138 days on which each
person has done his part, your day arrives. Are you obligated to
take your turn? You have beneﬁted from it, occasionally opening the window to listen, enjoying some music or chuckling at
someone’s funny story. The other people have put themselves
out. But must you answer the call when it is your turn to do so?
As it stands, surely not. Though you beneﬁt from the arrangement, you may know all along that 364 days of entertainment
supplied by others will not be worth giving up one day. You
would rather not have any of it and not give up a day than have
it all and spend one of your days at it.
It is hard to reject Nozick’s conclusion in respect of this particular
example, not least since we are naturally wary of others’ foisting

284

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

gifts on us and then expecting us to reciprocate in some fashion.
How would the story need to be ampliﬁed in order for us to agree
that an obligation had been created? The most obvious ways
would be to describe the reluctant payer agreeing to set up such a
scheme, or voting for (or against) its institution in a neighbourhood poll, or else failing to dissent when an invitation to do so
had been extended. But then the argument would attest some sort
of consent. Perhaps one could ﬁll out the story so that the dissenter gets great pleasure from listening, looks forward to transmissions and then seeks to avoid doing her stint in the way fare
dodgers get on buses and avoid payment. Now she looks tightﬁsted with her time in the way folk who leave a pub without paying their round are tight-ﬁsted with their wallet. We can elaborate
the story to show that she is a poor neighbour, ungenerous and
miserly, but unlike the non-payer in the pub, I don’t think we can
accuse her of being unfair to the point of failing an obligation
unless we can articulate some convention that she understands
and violates.
Of course, those who defend the principle of fairness will insist
that the principle itself is the operative convention. But this can’t
be right. Nozick’s counterexample illustrates the need for much
more speciﬁcity. My instinct is that the more speciﬁcity is provided
to make intelligible the particular case, the more evident it will be
that we are charting understandings which are familiar to those
engaged in the co-operative ventures. And the more explicit such
understandings become, the more clearly we shall ﬁnd that we are
witnessing good old-fashioned tacit consent.
That is a hunch which would need to be veriﬁed in the discussion
of particular cases. But we can save ourselves the work by examining directly the use of this argument to establish that citizens have
duties. An interesting wrinkle on Hart’s argument is that if citizens have such duties (he is thinking primarily of the obligation to
obey the law) then these duties are owed, not to the sovereign, but
to other citizens. So we can consider how well Hart’s principle
applies.
I think it is odd to consider the conduct of life in a state as a
joint enterprise that citizens undertake. Rather like Nozick’s hapless listener, or Hume’s shipbound traveller, we just ﬁnd ourselves
here (and probably stuck here, too). Nonetheless, we may ﬁnd that

285

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

living here has its beneﬁts. The state is a great provider of services.
It recruits armies to protect us from alien aggression, police forces
and other instruments of law and order to protect us from criminals, health services to keep us alive and well, education services
to enable us to make a living. The state may be what it claims – the
servant of the people. Some of these services we ﬁnd provided
willy-nilly. Some of these we may endorse in a half-hearted fashion
– this is how the police force views our view of them – but some of
them we may actively pursue. We may queue up for social service
beneﬁts or rush into hospitals for treatment. We may require the
state to build more motorways or make better provision to collect
our rubbish. Some of these services we may detest, believing that
they compromise both our safety and our principles. Many feel this
way about the ‘nuclear umbrella’. God help us if it rains!
Suppose we do seek out what the state has on offer, we do identify speciﬁc beneﬁts and demand them, we do request protection or
assistance from the state. Are we being unfair to fellow citizens if
we do not accept the concomitant burdens of citizenship? I think
we might be. Certainly it is possible to describe examples which
present the appearance of unfairness in the sense of folks who
beneﬁt mightily being unwilling to accept a reasonable burden. In
the 1970s in Britain, there was a well-publicized case of a very
wealthy family, polo players and friends of royalty, owners of great
estates in the Highlands of Scotland as well as a chain of butchers,
who had paid no taxation on the proﬁts of their businesses for
most of the century. (My mother-in-law, on reading this story,
turned from a Conservative to a Trotskyite overnight.)
Such people aren’t paying their way. Who knows what songs the
sirens of self-deception sing to them as they sign the income tax
forms their clever accountants prepare? Governments approve and
encourage the sentiments of disapproval, but sadly, most often,
when the villains are no great gainers, being ‘welfare scroungers’
or the like. It is cases like these which lend most plausibility to
Hart’s insight, where the principle of fairness is employed to identify cheats – those who aren’t playing by the rules of the game,
though if they are rich enough, they will be abiding by the rule of
law.
Hart’s principle is very abstract, too abstract, I suggest, for
universal application without examining the details of the

286

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

circumstances in which it is employed. When it is articulated in
circumstances wherein it ﬁnds plausible employment, it amounts
to the claim that it is unfair if, for example, people aren’t paying for
goods they enjoy, if their enjoyment is secured by the payments of
others on whose willingness, or mute acceptance, or inability to
escape payment, they freeload or free-ride. As a justiﬁcation of
one’s legal obligation not to steal, for example, the argument is
unnecessary. Theft, as many other crimes, violates moral rights
which the state afﬁrms and reinforces. The thief is ﬁrst and foremost
a thief. We don’t need to ﬁnd him guilty of free-riding in our anxiety
to specify a moral wrong as a justiﬁcation of legal punishment.
Nozick’s cheeky counterexample serves a useful purpose. In forcing us to examine the circumstances in which beneﬁts are
extended and enjoyed, it requires us to examine what we ask of the
state, and how it is to be paid for. Hart’s argument is, at bottom,
sound. We shouldn’t both insist on the provision of beneﬁts and
then make every effort to avoid paying for them when this inevitably puts the burden of payment on others. The principle of fairness requires that we shouldn’t cheat, that we shouldn’t dump the
costs of services we embrace on others. I think we all understand
this. I think no one believes that the services of government are
costless, manna from a bureaucratic heaven. In which case, we
need to explore the understandings, to ﬁnd the conventions concealed within our acceptance or pursuit of the goods government
provides. If we are honest we should recognize the burdens our
acceptances entail. But if we are clear-sighted, we shall deny that
these burdens come in a package that cannot be dismembered, as
though if we buy one we buy all.
This is what governments are prone to tell us. We don’t need to
believe them. They say: if we want the protection of the local constabulary, we have to pay for the nuclear weapons. And we know
that they have ways of making you pay. What they cannot do,
wherever beneﬁts are touted but rejected, is insist that fairness
grounds the demand for payment.
Hart’s principle of fairness is silly if it purports to justify those
restraints on my liberty which would prevent me harming others,
as though it would be quite wrong for me to assault them or steal
from them only in so far as I require the state to protect me against
the predations of others. Such behaviour would be wrong even if

287

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

one made no such claims and announced that one regarded himself
as in a Hobbesian state of nature with everyone else. Think again
of Militia Man. This is the sort of independence he is likely to
assert. It would be a futile exercise to try to track down the state
services he accepts. We are likely to ﬁnd ourselves trying to pin
him down to accepting the Department of Defence and the nuclear
umbrella. He is likely to take us seriously and buy more ammunition. Those who think this argument has strength, as I do, should
draw in their horns. If folks solicit beneﬁts, they should recognize
that these have a cost and they should accept that the cost is
civility, a willingness to otherwise pay their way.
I say this is a good argument. This doesn’t mean that it applies to
everyone or that anyone to whom it does apply should accept all
the burdens the state is eager to impose. It suggests a caution:
don’t seek out the the goodies that the state dangles before you
without exploring the small print. In a sense this advice is otiose:
there is no small print governing our transactions with the state.
Unless the understandings are written up explicitly and published
in print large enough for even, or to be literal, especially, the blind
to read, we are not committed to them, and should not ﬁnd ourselves presumed to accept them. The state should welcome Hart’s
argument; it captures a wider segment of the population than
heretofore could be enlisted as dutiful citizens. But obviously
there will be some who announce that they will take all that is
offered so long as this does not entail any obligations on their own
part. They are oblivious to considerations of fairness since they
pronounce themselves willing to do without the touted beneﬁts.
Perhaps, being Militia Men, they are well armed.
Gratitude and good government
I can think of one last argument the state may advance – and
perhaps the last should have been ﬁrst, since this argument was
outlined by Socrates in Plato’s Crito. This argument claims that
citizens ought to be grateful for what they have received from the
state, and, further, the gratitude should be signalled by the citizens’ acceptance of their duties. Again, the ﬁrst step in the argument is a claim that the citizen has received beneﬁts, so to proceed

288

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

we must assume that this is true. Clearly, if the citizens do not
receive beneﬁts from the state, there is nothing for them to be
grateful for. The next step in the argument is the claim that citizens ought to feel grateful to the state. The ﬁnal step is the claim
that acceptance of the duties of citizenship is the appropriate
expression of gratitude. We can see the distinctness of steps two
and three in the details of a recent immigration case, reported in
the newspapers, which captures this structure nicely.
An army ofﬁcer’s life was saved by one of his Gurkha soldiers.
Properly, he felt grateful and expressed his gratitude by promising
to educate the soldier’s son in Britain. As these things go, the son
was refused the necessary immigration credentials, so the former
ofﬁcer (a wealthy man) said he would leave the country, too. I think
(but am not sure) that the story had a happy ending. In the ﬁrst
place, the ofﬁcer was right to feel grateful. In the second place he
chose to express his gratitude by taking on an obligation to the
father, and to the boy, to see to his education. Having taken on
board this obligation, the ofﬁcer judged correctly that he was morally required to fulﬁl it. One can think of other ways in which the
ofﬁcer could have expressed his gratitude, ways which did not
place him under an obligation – indeed, this is a nice example of
how acts of gratitude can be as generous as the services that give
rise to them.
It is important that steps two and three in the argument are
distinguished. They can easily become conﬂated when we speak of
‘debts of gratitude’ as though the government pursues payment of
these debts when it holds us to our obligations. Rousseau stated
that ‘gratitude is a duty to be paid, but not a right to be exacted’:
not exacted, that is by parents against children or by the state
against its citizens.48 Since many of the duties of the citizen are
enforceable, Rousseau thought they could not be derived from
gratitude. As we shall see, this is a mistake. For the moment,
though, we should register the philosophical oddity of speaking of
debts of gratitude, of announcing feelings of gratitude in the
language of ‘I owe you one’. The payment of debts can be insisted
on as an obligation of the debtor, whereas however appropriate or
felicitous gratitude might be, it can’t be the proper object of a
demand or claim, the issue of a special right.49
It is perfectly clear, on the other hand, that we can insist that

289

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

persons ought to be grateful, taking gratitude to be a distinctive
feeling or attitude appropriate in one who has received a beneﬁt.
We teach our children that gifts cannot be claimed as rights and
that they ought to feel appropriately grateful. We train them to feel
grateful by making them act out the rituals of gratitude, minimally
saying, ‘Thank you’, and undertaking the chore of writing conventional ‘Thank you’ letters following birthdays and Christmas.
We trust that in these ways we teach them what to feel as well as
how to behave. We teach good habits as a way of inculcating good
dispositions of character.
These commonplaces are worth bringing to mind because they
effectively refute one line of argument against the claim that political obligations may derive from gratitude. The bad argument goes
as follows:
If political obligation is an obligation of gratitude, and if an
obligation of gratitude is an obligation to feel certain things,
there can be no political obligations (on these grounds, at least)
since we cannot make sense of obligations or duties to feel certain things in a certain way. Feelings cannot be the objects of
obligations. In any case, political obligations are obligations to
act, not to feel, to act obediently, for example, rather than to feel
obedient.50
This argument runs together the different steps in the argument
that I have been at pains to distinguish, but at the heart of it is a
claim that should be disputed to the effect that we cannot be
required to have speciﬁc feelings since feelings aren’t the sort of
things we can be expected to control by way of trying to have or
inhibit.51 This is a blunder of a crudely Kantian sort. Feelings can
be taught and learned, modiﬁed, sharpened or quietened by effort
on the part of the sufferer and her educators – and this includes
feelings of gratitude. Indeed, if feelings were not, in some measure,
in the control of those who exhibit them, it would be odd to criticize folk for the lack of them. In the case of ingratitude this is
particularly obvious. I accept that it is odd to speak of obligations
to feel gratitude but that is not the claim that I am trying to establish. Rather I seek to show that one can claim that people ought to
feel gratitude without committing a philosophical blunder.

290

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

The next claim that needs to be defended is that it is philosophically acceptable to say of citizens that they ought to feel
grateful for the goods and services they receive from government. I
don’t want to claim that any such judgement is true – who knows
which government is being discussed? – just that the proposition
makes sense. This claim needs defence because there are objections in the ﬁeld. The ﬁrst objection begins with the plausible
thought that feelings of gratitude are only appropriate as a
response to beneﬁts which have been conferred with a suitable
motive. If you give me a fast motorbike in the hope that I will soon
come a cropper, I will feel no gratitude as soon as I learn of your
devious plan. To generalize, the identiﬁcation of goodwill in the
provision of the beneﬁt is required before gratitude is appropriate.
In the case of gratitude for the services of the state, we must
therefore be able to impute motives to the state. But ‘the attribution of motives to a government may be impossible or incoherent’.52
The only possible reply is that we do it all the time. And we are
equally cavalier in our imputation of motives to other institutions.
This ﬁrm cares (or doesn’t care) for its staff, this university takes
seriously (or ignores) its task of teaching students, this hospital is
helpful to (or hates) patients’ visitors. One could reply that this
talk is metaphorical, but this would not be a statement of the obvious. Rather, I suspect, it would indicate a strong and controversial
philosophical position, most likely some variety of methodological
individualism. We can shelve these discussions and move on, supposing that when, for example, it is claimed that ‘This government
really cares for old age pensioners’ the claim may be true or false
but is not incoherent.
Let us accept that motives can be fairly attributed to the state.
A further difﬁculty is encountered. In attributing, minimally,
motives of goodwill to the state, we are thinking of the state as
Lady Bountiful (or more likely Big Brother), viewing its disposing
of goods and services in the manner of gifts. On the contrary, the
state is our servant; it has nothing but duties to fulﬁl. And we
should not be grateful when it complies with its duties to its citizens. We should not be grateful to the policeman who rescues us
from the football fans who are just about to beat us up; he is doing
his job.
This, too, is an error, but it is understandable. We should resent

291

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

the posture of the statesman who speaks as though he is spending
his own money. Nonetheless, the ancient analogy with the family
can be usefully employed here. Parents have duties to their children willy-nilly, as children nowadays are prone to remind them. ‘I
didn’t ask to be born!’ you might have heard. This does not disqualify the thought that children should be grateful for what they have
received of right. The duties of the parent can be fulﬁlled with love
and grace, but even a grudging concession to a legitimate demand
can merit gratitude. After all, as we know too well, some parents
can’t manage even this.
Isn’t the same true of governments? Don’t we recognize the difference between an ethos of genuine service and a time-serving
reluctance to respect claimants? And shouldn’t we be grateful even
to heartless bureaucrats who are efﬁcient and conscientious in the
delivery of goods they are appointed to distribute? I can imagine –
indeed have heard – arguments pro and con, but I don’t believe that
the logical space for such disputes is the product of fallacious
reasoning. I don’t see, in principle, why one who does their duty
should not merit our gratitude.
The ﬁnal objection to the idea that one may be grateful to the
state for the goods and services it provides draws attention to the
constitution of the state. It asks, in the ﬁrst place: to whom or to
what should one be grateful? Some, abhorring the possibility that
an exotic metaphysic may be imputed to them, insist that the citizen who has grounds for gratitude should be grateful to her fellow
citizens.53 This strikes me as an evasion. One should not be grateful
to all of one’s fellow citizens severally. Some, as we have seen, have
resolutely avoided paying their share towards the provision of
services of which they have been massive beneﬁciaries. Others,
perforce, have been recipients only, being too poor to make any
payment towards social provision. Shame on the ﬁrst, damn shame
for the second – but in either case, feelings of gratitude would be
misplaced. So if we should be grateful to our fellow citizens, we
have to think of them collectively, which on my reading amounts to
our being grateful to the state.
There is something creepy about sentiments of gratitude being
directed towards the modern state, but part of this may be due to a
reluctance to see the state as ‘other’. Aren’t we all democrats nowadays? We shall have more to say about democracy in the ﬁnal

292

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

chapter, but for the moment we should recognize that one element
in democratic thinking is the claim that we all have equal political
standing. Regarding the state as other and in some measure alien
to us, seems to presuppose a hierarchical relationship between
state and citizen which does not sit well with the democratic ideal.
The instinct which grounds the suspicion that there is something
undemocratic about institutions to which one may direct gratitude
expresses a truth which is hard to weigh.
The only form of state in which gratitude seems to be
inappropriate would be a direct democracy which takes all
decisions by plebiscite, a simple Rousseauian model wherein all
are equally citizens and subjects. In this model, citizens should
be viewed as providing goods and services for themselves. Like
members of a winning football team, they should feel pride rather
than gratitude for their success in self-provision. But even in
these circumstances, gratitude might not be entirely out of place.
Citizens may think of their democracy as a unity which serves all
its members. Players in winning teams may feel grateful to the
team and their fellow members for granting them the opportunity
of success, as well as pride for the part they have played in
achieving it. In any event the modern representative forms of
democracy do not work like this. The structures of decisionmaking and the bureaucracies created to put policies into effect
are sufﬁciently alien to citizens that gratitude may be appropriate
when they perform their assigned functions conscientiously and
well.
I conclude that one who feels grateful for the provision of state
services has not committed a philosophical error, though in particular circumstances gratitude may be misplaced, may indeed be
witness to the citizen’s capture by a successful ideology. If this is
right, we can now move on to the ﬁnal question: what does gratitude require of the citizen who properly feels it? Here, there are
two routes we can take. The ﬁrst is indirect, arguing that one who
fails to comply with the duties of citizenship harms the state. The
focus is not so much on the requirement of gratitude but on the
evil of ingratitude. As Hobbes saw, ingratitude is often imprudent;
the fourth law of nature thus requires that ‘a man which receiveth
beneﬁt from another of meer Grace, Endeavour that he which
giveth it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good will’.54

293

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

But as many have taught us, as well as being imprudent, it is also a
great vice to harm a benefactor.
Is this what we are doing when we fail in our political obligations? We certainly may be. The state is harmed directly if we
evade payment of taxes, commit treason or encourage others to
break the law. But not all law-breaking is like this. It is surely a
matter of fact whether the state is harmed when citizens break the
licensing laws or drive beyond the speed limits, and often such acts
will be harmless. I don’t see any argument that could take us to the
conclusion that all law-breaking amounts to ingratitude since it
harms the state or one’s fellow citizens.
The direct way of arguing will serve us just as well. All that
gratitude to the state could require is that citizens do their duty by
it. It is entirely disingenuous to suggest that we might willingly
take the beneﬁts the state provides, send a ‘Thank you’ letter, then
dodge the demands of the state, refusing to take compliance as an
obligation. But on the other side, as I stated before, we should not
be too po-faced about these duties, identifying them as an all-ornothing requirement that citizens obey all the laws all the time.
The good society and the sensible state can afford to be relaxed
about the incidence and severity of law-breaking. Individuals
should not be worried that their standing as good citizens is
impugned by an episode of after-hours drinking or opportunistic
speeding on an empty motorway. The duties of citizenship under
good government should not generally weigh in as an onerous burden or tight constriction, though on occasions, for example, a call
for military service, the demands may be severe.
Finally, it may be suggested that it is odd to think of compliance
as a grateful response, since the state exacts compliance, most of
the citizens’ duties being enforceable, demanded under threat of
penalty. But demanding isn’t getting. However forceful the
demands of the state, the liberal insists that they have no legitimacy until they are endorsed by the citizen. It is in the process of
inspecting the demands of the state that the citizen should take
account of the fact, if it is a fact, that he has beneﬁted in a fashion
for which he should be grateful.
Before we leave this question, there is one qualiﬁcation that
ought to be made. Gratitude is the appropriate response to good
government, not merely government that provides us with the

294

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

goods and services we value. Suppose a state has two classes of
citizens, those who receive beneﬁts and those who are excluded
from beneﬁts. Should those in the lucky class feel grateful and
endorse the political obligations which are thereby incumbent on
them? My inclination is to conclude that they should not. To use
the analogy of the family (which gives me particular pleasure,
given the derision it has met with from modern contributors to this
debate who dismiss swiftly the lessons Plato derives from it):
Should the Ugly Sisters feel grateful to their parents for the beneﬁts they have been granted (and thereby accept an obligation to
follow their parents’ wishes or obey their commands) if they know
that their good fortune has been achieved at Cinderella’s expense?
Nothing has been spent on poor Cinders, and the only reason the
Ugly Sisters have time to paint their faces and primp their hair is
because Cinders is busy doing the chores. Probably the Ugly
Sisters feel grateful, but ought they to?
For all that the duties of parents have their foundations in love
and other sloppy sentiments, they can be partly speciﬁed as duties
incumbent on them in virtue of a role, a role or position of moral
responsibility in which they stand to all of their children equally.
Something has gone wrong in a family where there is a grossly
inequitable division of labours and favours. Whereas parents can’t
be commanded to love all their children equally or in the same
fashion, all the children should recognize that something has gone
drastically wrong if it is always one of them who has to sweep the
hearth. The Ugly Sisters should be ashamed of themselves, and
this shame should qualify their gratitude. They should feel
unworthy of the favouritism they enjoy.
I shall take it that this example ﬁnds a consensus of approval,
having found that in pantomimes, we all ‘Boo’ in the same places. I
claim something similar should be working with respect to our
attitudes to the state. If some (in a democracy, it will generally be
a majority) receive beneﬁts which others do not enjoy, or receive
beneﬁts in conspicuously and comparatively generous measure,
they should regard the beneﬁts as a poisoned chalice, morally
tainted by the inequity of its distribution. They should regard
themselves as morally compromised, shamed in a fashion the Ugly
Sisters ought to recognize. This is an intuition; I can’t think of any
arguments that might support it beyond the thought that gratitude

295

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

is not appropriate for beneﬁts with an unjust or immoral
provenance.

Conclusion
We have examined a variety of arguments that purport to give
grounds for citizens accepting the duties of the citizen, construing
these widely. With the exception of the hypothetical contract
argument which needs much careful expansion and defence, all of
these arguments are conditional on the citizen doing something –
swearing allegiance, being party to a constitutional settlement,
behaving in such a way that one may fairly conclude that he
accepts a convention which entails obligations, including perspicuously conventions which ground the practice of voting in
democracies or conventions or moral rules associated with the
acceptance of beneﬁts, concerning fairness or gratitude.
These are all useful arguments, so long as they are not advanced
in the expectation that they must be accepted by everyone, so long
as they are not taken to be universal in scope. This looks to be a
weakness from the point of view of the state that advances them. It
seeks to capture all citizens in its net, but if citizens don’t do the
things from which their obligations may be deduced to follow, they
can’t be captured. It looks as though it is possible that there will
always be citizens who can properly repudiate the duties imputed
to them by the state.
The conclusion we may be tempted to draw is that dubbed ‘philosophical anarchism’, which openly accepts the limitations of
the arguments cited. The ‘philosophical’ anarchists, as against the
real variety, are content to cite the philosophical deﬁcits in the
arguments of the ambitious state. They are a gentlemanly lot, not
too bothered by the thought, which the real anarchist will detest,
that prudence for the most part dictates compliance with the
state’s demands. They will be disposed, not so much to protest or
wave the black ﬂag in insurrection, but to say, ‘Excuse me, your
arguments aren’t quite as good as you believe them to be’. This
conclusion may well be false. A hypothetical contract has some
prospect of success (and some utilitarians believe that they can
establish the rules which govern the duties of the citizen).

296

POLITICAL OBLIGATION

A wise state will see the philosophical anarchist, and even Militia Man, as a challenge. It will seek to seduce them rather than
trample them underfoot, by providing beneﬁts they cannot resist
and making clear how far their receipt invokes conventions or
moral principles which require the acceptance of obligations in
consequence. As the arguments in favour of political obligation
have been reviewed, I have characterized the stance of the state as
adverse, as seeking to ‘capture’ the allegiance of the citizen, as
being able to announce ‘Aha! That’s you dealt with’ to the citizen
who would naturally be a reluctant recruit. It’s easy to amplify
Hume’s example of the shipbound traveller and identify the state
as the Press Gang.
This would be a mistake. We do better to think of the state as
seducer and the clever citizen as raising the stakes, requesting
more and more blandishments, insisting that the goods be
delivered. The conservative will hate this talk, recognizing the
introduction of a customer or client mentality into the sacred
domain of allegiance. But then the conservative is always out of
date, defending the intuitions of the last-but-one epoch against
advances which are already securely in place. The state which is
eager to claim that its citizens have obligations to it does best if it
works out how to serve them well. It may well ﬁnd that there is no
philosophical deﬁcit, that Militia Man is ﬂeeing his own good.
More fool him.
It is vital that we see clearly the moral stance taken by the state
towards its citizens, so the details of the constitution matter when
we investigate the obligations of the citizen. We have seen how a
democratic constitution can give rise to its own speciﬁc reasons for
adducing such obligations in the case of the quasi-consent
described by Singer. The fact that such an argument is available is
a mighty reason for endorsing democracy. But there are other
reasons, too, for us to commend this family of methods of decisionmaking (as well as objections). It is to the examination of these
arguments that we now turn.

297

Chapter 7

Democracy

Introduction
Thus far we have examined normative theories, notably utilitarianism, in their application to political questions, we have investigated central political ideals, liberty, rights and justice, and we
have tackled the problem of political obligation. Much of this discussion has been conducted in a manner that supposed that there
were two central characters: the state and the citizen. The question of the proper constitution of the state has arisen in a variety
of contexts: political liberty requires that citizens be able to take
part in the decision-making processes of the state, the right of
citizens to participate is a crucial human right and, in Rawls’s
theory of justice, is a vital element of the liberty principle. The
form taken by government may well make a difference to the issue
of whether citizens have good moral reasons to obey the state,
since if they participate in democratic procedures, this may witness a measure of consent to the outcome. It is fair to say that the
background to many of the arguments we have pursued has

299

DEMOCRACY

invoked a subscription to democratic principles. These principles,
which apply directly to the mechanisms of taking political
decisions, need a more careful and explicit investigation. In discussing democracy, we shall be gathering together some of the
leading themes of previous chapters.
So far as the rhetoric of decision-making goes, it may seem that
democracy is the only game in town. As with human rights, the
rhetoric is so powerful that there are few tyrants so benighted that
they will deny the ideal of democratic institutions. It may be that
the society they govern is not yet ready or mature enough for democracy. It may be that democracy exists in a peculiarly apt local
version, like the democratic centralism of the former Soviet
Union, which located democracy within the mechanisms of oneparty rule. But few would follow Plato and denounce democracy as
an inefﬁcient and corrupt mechanism for taking political
decisions. In the face of a value so ubiquitous, not to say politically
correct, the philosopher wakes up and starts to ask the questions
begged by the overwhelmingly positive connotations of the term.
We need to begin afresh and examine the questions raised by
universal subscription to this mode of decision-making, to this
universal constitutional ideal.
Thomas Hobbes, as is well known, upset everybody. Republicans
accepted his conclusion that the citizens’ reason to obey a sovereign lay in their judgement (portrayed as a covenant or agreement)
that a sovereign was conducive to their best interests. Thus the
authority of the sovereign derives from the citizens’ agreement
with each other to recognize a sovereign and their subsequent
selection or endorsement of him or her as their representative.
Republicans, however, did not like his considered judgement that
they would do best to select one person, a monarch, to perform the
tasks of sovereignty. Monarchists, by contrast, applauded his view
of monarchy as the most efﬁcient form of sovereignty, but hated
the thought that the monarch’s sovereign authority derives from
the will of the people.
Hobbes believed that three types of sovereign were possible:
monarchy, that is, government by one person; democracy, that is,
government by an assembly of all subjects; lastly, aristocracy, an
assembly of some nominated part of the commonwealth. His
preference for monarchy was dictated by his low opinion of the

300

DEMOCRACY

capacity of assemblies, whether of all or the few, to deliver the
goods to the citizens. But Hobbes’s view of the efﬁciency of monarchs can be challenged and forms of assembly can be constructed
with a view to their better procurement of the goods of sovereignty – personal safety and commodious living. If one accepts
Hobbes’s methodology and premisses it is but a short step to the
endorsement of some form of democracy, as James Mill saw. Slyly
noting that the typical English gentleman (‘a favourable specimen
of civilization, of knowledge, of humanity, of all the qualities, in
short, that make human nature estimable’) acts as a tyrant when
he emigrates to the West Indies and becomes a slave-owner, he
rejects Hobbes’s claim that the shepherd will not feed off his ﬂock,
ﬁnding his own interests best served by the ‘riches, strength and
reputation of his Subjects’. What is required is an assembly which
the subjects tightly control, that is, a representative democracy.1
John Locke, too, disputed Hobbes cheerful acceptance of
monarchy (and by extension, indissoluble assemblies), noting that
there is danger still, that they will think themselves to have a
distinct interest, from the rest of their Community; and so will
be apt to increase their own Riches and Power, by taking, what
they think ﬁt, from the people.2
Locke is a proto-democrat, accepting that men (and nowadays, we
insist, women) who are born free and equal will demand a sovereign power which will reliably put their own will into effect
through legislation and the application of executive and federative
(roughly, foreign policy) powers. This requires a representative
assembly, though the principles of representation are not worked
out in detail.
Rousseau, writing seventy years after Locke, had worked out
from scratch the constitutional implications of the thought, not
quite common wisdom at the time, that men are born free and
equal. For Rousseau the only legitimate sovereign was a direct
democracy, each citizen being a law-making member of the sovereign as well as being subject to its laws. We shall begin our discussion of democracy by presenting Rousseau’s contribution to
democratic theory. This contribution is so seminal that one might
fairly conclude that much of contemporary democratic theory is a

301

DEMOCRACY

series of footnotes to Rousseau. ‘Much’ but not ‘all’ since, as we
have seen, utilitarian thought has made a distinctive contribution
to our thinking about democracy.

Rousseau: freedom, equality and the general will
Rousseau accepts that we have a natural care for ourselves
(amour de soi) as well as a natural feeling of compassion (pitié) for
the suffering of others. We have also come to acquire, in the course
of the dreadful history of our species, a concern for private property. In addition though, we attach a particular value to our own
independence. Or rather we would value independence if we had
not been corrupted by the social institutions we have created.
Rousseau can describe this natural independence because the
traces of it still remain in his own obdurate, genuinely and
acknowledgedly anti-social personality. We could see it, if, as in
the thought experiment he conducts in Emile, we were to insulate
a child from all the inﬂuences of society and educate him in a
fashion that develops rather than smothers his natural capacities.
We could see it, too, if we were to observe the origins of our species
as solitary but healthy and well-satisﬁed hunter-gatherers, as he
conjectures in the Discourse on the Origins of Inequality. Rousseau’s visions of natural man are tantalizing, but hopeless starting
points for an argument.
We do better if we simply state the conclusions licensed by his
speculations and see how these work as premisses in the argument
that follows. We may well be sympathetic to them, recognizing how
they incorporate insights familiar from the liberal tradition in
which he is working. Since for the most part they represent conclusions we have already drawn in previous chapters, we can take them
as familiar and plausible premisses for the argument to follow.
Independence has two related dimensions – liberty and equality.
If we are independent of each other, we are free in the sense that
we do not depend on the assistance or goodwill of others in order
to satisfy our desires. Dependency is also a condition of inequality.
In fact, Rousseau believes everyone becomes dependent under
conditions of inequality: ‘each became in some degree a slave even
in becoming the master of other men: if rich, they stood in need of

302

DEMOCRACY

the services of others; if poor, of their assistance.’3 For Rousseau,
these are natural values. It follows that those who value survival,
and could not live well unless their liberty and equality were not
protected, would not accept the state unless it were necessary to
promote these goods. The state, Rousseau believes, is required
when life, property, liberty and equality are threatened. This is
entirely a formal condition. If, as a matter of fact these goods are
secure, there is no need for the state.4
Suppose then that a state is necessary; what form should it take
for those concerned with the protection and promotion of these
goods? In the ﬁrst place, it should protect life and (some measure
of) property, but it should seek these goals in a way that respects
(perhaps maximizes, perhaps renders optimally coherent) principles of liberty and equality. The natural versions of these values
are lost in the recesses of history, and, more importantly for those
who think history beside the point, are inconsistent with the
necessity of the state. The optimal state will institutionalize some
analogues of natural liberty and equality; it will command our
allegiance if it can reproduce in its constitution and ongoing life
social conditions which are faithful to these values.
Before we look at the details, let me reproduce the essentials of
the constitution of the republic of the Social Contract so that we
can better understand ‘the principles of political right’ (the subtitle of the book) in the light of their institutional embodiment.
Citizens are active members of the sovereign. The state is composed of subjects. All citizens are equally subjects, obliged to obey
laws they enact collectively by majority decision in an assembly, so
‘the sovereign’ designates the active, law-making power of the
republic, ‘the state’ designates its rulebound character, these
terms being different descriptions of the same institution.5 The
republic is a direct democracy since rational agents would not
delegate their law-making powers to a representative.
In what ways does an institution of this form respect the liberty
of the citizens? In the ﬁrst place, moral liberty is secured. Moral
liberty has two elements: it amounts to free will, which Rousseau
tells us in the Discourse on the Origins of Inequality is the distinctive ability of humans, as against animals, to resist the beckonings
of desire, to reject temptation. ‘Nature lays her commands on
every animal, and the brute obeys her voice. Man receives the same

303

DEMOCRACY

impulsion, but at the same time knows himself at liberty to acquiesce or resist.’7 Modern man, as Rousseau describes him, is
enslaved to all manner of factitious and unnatural desires. He evidently does not have the resources of individual free agency which
would enable him to control them – otherwise there would be no
need of the state. The state, enacting laws with penalties attached,
is an indirect mechanism for enabling citizens to keep to the
straight and narrow path of virtue, a means of social self-control.
Free agency in the modern world is a social achievement.
The second aspect to moral liberty concerns the source of the
laws which procure freedom. They cannot be the imposition of a
wise and paternal authority. The laws which guide and coerce us
along the paths of virtue, forcing us to be free,7 are laws of our own
making: ‘man acquires in the civil state, moral liberty, which alone
makes him master of himself; for the mere impulse of appetite is
slavery, while obedience to a law which we prescribe to ourselves is
liberty.’8
The second dimension of liberty which is promoted in the republic of the Social Contract is civil liberty. Rousseau faces a difﬁculty
here, which he well recognizes.9 Citizens yield all their rights to
the sovereign, which has absolute unlimited authority. Civil liberty is the space for private activity and the enjoyment of possessions which is both limited and protected by the law. The law which
prevents me from stealing your goods equally protects me from
your thieving. But how can a measure of civil liberty be preserved
against the authority of a sovereign to whom all rights have been
ceded? Rousseau argues that his citizens value liberty. Would
those who love liberty abrogate it to no useful purpose? We must
suppose the same values which dictate the form of the constitution
to motivate those who act as citizen legislators. Rousseau believed
that he had deﬂected the threat of what was later diagnosed as the
threat of majority tyranny. We shall take up this problem later.
The ﬁnal dimension of liberty I shall dub political liberty, echoing my usage in Chapter 3. It is the liberty of the self-legislator,
adduced above as moral liberty, but now taking an explicitly political form as the right of citizens to vote in assemblies which
determine the law. Berlin, as we saw, was very suspicious of the
claim that this truly amounts to liberty – democracy or selfgovernment is one value, liberty another, and these may conﬂict

304

DEMOCRACY

when civil (negative) liberties are infringed by democratic
decisions. We may limit liberties if a majority so decides or constrain majority decisions if this is necessary to protect liberty, but
we should not claim that we are maximizing or effecting trade-offs
in respect of one value. A plurality of values are at stake here. But
Rousseau is clear that one who participates in assemblies which
make the law is not subject to alien impositions, which subjection
is a clear infringement of liberty. Rousseau is surely right – and it
is worth recalling the obvious but neglected point that those who
possess such legislative powers have the opportunity to take part
in (are not hindered in their pursuit of) an activity which they
independently value – as clear a manifestation of Berlin’s negative
liberty as any.
Natural liberty, the liberty of the independent soul who fashions
a life for herself in conditions which do not require any interaction
with others, is lost. In its place, individuals have acquired a
strengthening of their moral liberty and a protected sphere of civil
liberty through the exercise of political liberty which the
opportunity for democratic participation yields. But the second
natural value which is concomitant with independence is equality.
In what way is that preserved under the constitution of the
democratic republic?
Equality, too, has three dimensions for Rousseau. First, let us
look at political equality. The citizen who has political liberty, the
power of participation, insists that this be equal political power.
‘Men become everyone equal by convention and legal right.’10 Each
has one vote to contribute in the decision-making process. Since
political power is equal, no one is dependent on the power of
others, nor do they have others dependent on themselves. Equality
of political power and political liberty reinforce each other. No
one is enslaved by inequities of political power, neither seeking to
enslave others nor being vulnerable to the ambitions of others for
political mastery.
A second kind of equality is necessary for democracy to work
well – rough equality of material possessions. In the Discourse on
Inequality, Rousseau had demonstrated the corrupting effect of
divisions of rich and poor. Such divisions corrode liberty through
the effects of patterns of dependence within the economy. Inevitably, an unequal distribution of wealth will transform itself into

305

DEMOCRACY

an unequal distribution of political power. In the Social Contract
he insists that democracy cannot work with extremes of wealth
and poverty. It requires, not an exact equality of riches, but a distribution of them such that ‘no citizen shall ever be wealthy
enough to buy another, and none poor enough to be forced to sell
himself’. ‘Allow neither rich men nor beggars’, he observes in the
footnote to this passage.11 As we have seen, there are many
arguments favouring distributions of wealth which tend towards
equality. This is a fresh one, and one that is easily overlooked. If
political equality is an important value, Rousseau is surely right
that some measure of material equality is a necessary condition of
it. We should recognize that the sort of private wealth that permits
effective campaign contributions or active campaigning through
the private ownership of inﬂuential media is undemocratic
through its subversion of the ideal of equal political power.
The ﬁnal kind of equality which Rousseau’s democracy serves is
equality before the law. Rousseau has in mind Harrington’s ideal
of a ‘government of laws, not of men’, believing that law is properly
general in form, its prescriptions detailing types of action and
being directed to all members of a community. No one is above the
law, but just as important, no one may be subjected to attainder,
picked out as an individual ﬁt for punishment, her offence being
that of being designated an offender. If Rousseau’s point seems
strange, that is because the battle has been won for his cause. The
value at stake is more likely nowadays to be described as one element in a speciﬁcation of due process of law. The phenomenon he
detested, arbitrary arrest and punishment, is still with us, but
tyrants nowadays have generally learned that rigged trials or laws
that trick up descriptions that a targeted minority will satisfy are a
necessary concession to moral decency.
The basic constitution of the republic of the Social Contract is
justiﬁed as satisfying the requirements rational men place on
the political order, namely the protection of life and property
consistently with the preservation of liberty and equality. These
are the ideals that Rousseau’s version of democracy explicitly
serves. The speciﬁcation of the constitution provides as good a
working deﬁnition of democracy as any. You may wonder
that my account of Rousseau’s democratic theory has so far
made no mention of his distinctive contribution – the notion of the

306

DEMOCRACY

general will, but as we shall see, all the materials for this are ready
to hand.
Rousseau’s contractors, which is to say any citizens concerned
to discover and put into effect the principles of political right,
recognize that the prudential and moral ideals which alone justify
the existence and speciﬁc democratic form of the sovereign
authority must also govern their deliberations when they act as
legislators. The principles of political right motivate their political actions – they manifest a general will, which takes a political
form when it is expressed as the outcome of the democratic process, as a decision favoured by the majority of voters. The general
will is the will of the citizens and the will of the sovereign when it
enacts legislation.
Rousseau’s notion of the general will has puzzled many readers
and has been the subject of vexed interpretative disputes. There
would be no problem if the general will were to be understood as
the will of people in general as registered in a vote. Any
democratic decision procedure would then yield a general will by
deﬁnition. There is no doubt that this sense of generality is in
Rousseau’s mind. That is why it is important to him that the constitution is that of a direct democracy. The ideals of Rousseau’s
contractors do not permit representative institutions; neither an
elected assembly, nor, as in Hobbes’s description, a monarchy,
could assure the appropriate identity over time of the sovereign’s
will and that of the citizens. The commitment expressed by
Hobbes’s contractors, to take the sovereign’s decisions as their
own, would be irrational if the sovereign body were anything less
than the whole body of the people. How could an autonomous
agent surrender the power of exercise of her rational will in a
domain of particular importance, that of political decisionmaking? So Rousseau wants his readers to be aware that if the will
of a republic is general it cannot be issued in the voice of a monarch or elected assembly. This claim is radical; it disqualiﬁes as
illegitimate the decisions of all the sovereigns of his day (and to
my knowledge, all present-day sovereigns, too).
Radical though this element of generality may be, it still does
not capture the heart of Rousseau’s doctrine, since it locates the
general will in the legislative actions of the sovereign, the whole
of which the citizen is a part. The general will is equally

307

DEMOCRACY

manifested in the actions of citizens severally when they participate as law-making members of the sovereign. So how can we
characterize that expression of the general will? The central features of it are best brought out by a contrast of the general will
and the particular will.
The particular will is best viewed initially as the will of an individual who is pursuing his own interests, as the will of an egoist. It
is possible to construct a defence of democracy from this unlikely
premise, as Bentham and James Mill, in his reconstruction of
Hobbes, revealed later. Each person is in the best position to know
how their own best interests are advanced. When each person
casts a vote which records that interest, we can be certain that a
majority decision will maximize the aggregate interest by satisfying the majority (at the cost of frustrating the minority). This simple utilitarian argument needs massive qualiﬁcation or outright
rejection, not least because the power exerted by each citizen as
they pursue their own interests is so small as to make its expenditure inefﬁcient; truly self-interested citizens or citizens concerned to maximize general utility will not vote.12 But for the
moment, let us keep it in place so that we may clearly outline
Rousseau’s views in contrast to it.
Rousseau insists that we distinguish decisions which express a
general will from decisions of the utilitarian sort which register a
majority or even a unanimity of particular wills – ‘the will of all’.13
The distinction can best be drawn by considering the questions
those who manifest such wills put to themselves when they determine which policies they support. In the case of the particular
will, citizens will ask which policies suit them best; given their
conception of their own best interests, they will consider how
these interests may be advanced in the most efﬁcacious fashion. By
contrast, those who wish to form a general will with respect to the
policy proposals in hand will ask a different question. They will
consider which policy best promotes the interests and values they
share with others, interests and values in the light of which they
will recognize both the constitution as legitimate and constitutionally enacted decisions as valid. To be speciﬁc, they will ask
which of the candidate policies best secures the interest everyone
shares in their lives and property in a fashion which is consistent
with shared values of liberty and equality.

308

DEMOCRACY

The general will is, in each individual, a pure act of the understanding which reasons, when the passions are silent, about what
a man can ask of his fellows and what his fellows have the right
to ask of him. 14
There is a massive difference between the questions which elicit
a particular will and a general will, which demand an answer in the
ﬁrst-person, singular and plural respectively. Imagine a discussion
in some political forum, a programme on television, say. The question up for debate is ‘Should Scotland continue to have a devolved
assembly in Edinburgh?’. Panellists run through the standard
arguments for and against. ‘Scotland has been a nation since
whenever, with independent legal and educational establishments.
There will be a democratic deﬁcit without devolved control.’ ‘Continued devolution is inefﬁcient, costly and a brake on economic
growth.’ The ﬁnal panellist announces that she is all in favour,
disclosing that her auntie has a newsagents shop near the new
parliament buildings which she will inherit and which will continue to prosper mightily. I surmise that we would regard such a
bald statement of private interest as a joke, since we expect politicians or pundits, indeed anyone who addresses the public, to appeal
to reasons which they believe a good many of their audience share,
reasons, perhaps, that they believe all should share. Political questions, many believe, should be asked in the voice of the ﬁrst-person
plural: Does this policy suit us, in the light of values we share?
This is the grammar of the general will. Its plural voice attests
what Rousseau describes as the common (or public) good (or
interest). What is the public interest or the common good?15 In
Rousseau’s own terms, the answer is easily given. It comprises the
purposes of political association and hence the terms on which
any association can command authority. To be speciﬁc, the public
interest is satisﬁed, the common good promoted, when citizens’
votes are motivated by their desire to live (and live well), by their
respect for others’ aspirations to these things, and by their universal subscription to values of liberty and equality. The sovereign
is legitimate only if it serves these ends and these ends can be
served only if the sovereign is composed of all of the citizens, each
of whom decides policy issues in accordance with this consensus
on desires and values.

309

DEMOCRACY

It is important to recognize that the general will is transformative. Just as natural independence is lost, so is that sharp sense of
individual difference which motivates the moral ideal of autonomy. Rousseau’s lesson is that individual freedom is a social
achievement made possible only in a carefully articulated social
structure which enables citizens to act from a common perspective.
Democratic institutions are necessary for individual freedom, but
individual freedom is not a solitary project. It is witnessed in the
activities of public-spirited citizens who ﬂy to the polls. I should
emphasize that this is a recognizable phenomenon. The long
queues of voters outside polling stations in South Africa, waiting
to cast a vote for the ﬁrst time, singing and dancing together,
attest a common project rather than the pursuit of individual
aspirations. These people were not daft. They did not think, each
of them, that they were casting the vote that would make the
difference. Rather they were properly conﬁdent that they were
registering their subscription to the social values they deemed
should govern their lives, most notably perhaps, their equality as
citizens.
Rousseau’s conclusion is that if you ask the right question, you
will get the right answer. ‘Whether the general will is infallible’ is
the problem posed as the heading of Book II, Chapter III, and the
solution is that it is. We are used to deriding claims to infallibility.
John Stuart Mill teases Christians with examples of the many
occasions they have suffered from such claims.16 Subsequent Popes,
speaking on dogma, were to forget the lesson and provoke laughter
and scorn. Rousseau’s doctrine escapes the contumely that claims
to infallibility invite by announcing that, where folks agree on
basic principles, and apply such principles in the making of collective decisions, differences between them come out in the wash.
We all agree on what everyone wants and we all share a system of
values. What best promotes purposes on which we agree may be a
matter of dispute, but if the means of decision expresses our
agreement, and if the differences between us are the result of carelessness or unavoidable ignorance concerning how policies will
work out, we shan’t go far wrong if we abide by a majority decision.
Majorities, amongst those who evince a general will, will always
be right in this sense: their heart is in the right place; they are
thinking along the right lines.

310

DEMOCRACY

Rousseau’s general will is infallible in a further sense. It is wellformed and uncorrupted by particularity. There may be honest differences between people who ask themselves which policy option
best secures liberty, for example. But the differences will cancel
each other out; the majority decision is likely to give the right
answer just in case each voter has a better than even chance of
getting the answer right.17 Controversially, Rousseau believes that
citizens will tend to get the right answer only if they deliberate the
question at issue in a solitary fashion, consulting their own hearts,
uncorrupted by intrigues and factions. If parties emerge and citizens have the opportunity to identify with their aims, they will
lose sight of the general will of the community, forming a will
which is general amongst members of the partial association, yet
particular vis-à-vis ‘the great association’ of which all are
members.
In recognition of both the quality of argumentation and its
inﬂuence on subsequent discussions of democracy, I want to take
Rousseauian democracy as an ideal type. Students of Rousseau
will notice that I have not mentioned much of Rousseau’s development of these ideas in Books III and IV of the Social Contract – a
process of development which many have argued amounts to selfdestruction. I will mention some of these subsidiary doctrines as
their relevance becomes apparent to what follows. Rousseau would
not demur from the judgement that the republic of the Social Contract is an ideal construct, since he was quite clear that the only
institutions which could embody the principles of political right
would be radically unstable, either inefﬁcient or prone to corruption. Rousseau’s clear statement of democratic principles and outline sketch of democratic practice throws up plenty of problems
for further investigation. We shall begin by discussing his view
that the only genuine democracy is a direct democracy.

Direct and representative democracy
Amongst the great modern thinkers on democracy, Rousseau is the
odd one out in insisting that the only proper democratic state is a
direct democracy. His reasoning was simple. In a representative
system, citizens entrust their will to the representative sovereign.

311

DEMOCRACY

In Hobbes’s language, the sovereign is the actor, the citizens who
select the sovereign are the authors of the sovereign acts. Representatives are agents of the citizens; there is an identity of will, so
that one may recognize the will of the citizens in the actions of the
sovereign representative.18 The citizens’ will is expressed through
their voting for representatives. The work of the representatives, in
enacting legislation and the like, puts into effect the will of the
citizens.
‘If only . . . ’, thought Rousseau. This condition, of identity of
interest, is impossible to secure, not least because the representatives, if they form a collective as in a parliament, will swiftly form a
will general amongst themselves, and, as in factions or political
parties, a will that is particular vis-à-vis society at large, that will
fail to procure the common good. As a result it would be quite
irrational for citizens who value equality and liberty to put these
values under threat by giving up their sovereign power.
The institutional consequences of this inference were drastic.
Republics should be small, of such a size that ‘every member may
be known by every other’.19 He clearly has in mind communities
like the ancient Greek city-states, though in some moods he would
commend his native Geneva and, in the Social Contract, he
describes Corsica, for which, in his latter years, he prepared an
(incomplete) draft of a constitution, as one of the few states capable of achieving democracy. This severe constraint on the possible
size of a genuinely democratic community was a practical implication of Rousseau’s philosophical views – and it has been judged,
almost universally, to be impractical. This charge would not have
worried Rousseau: too bad for the modern nation-state if it cannot
meet the conditions necessary for it to be judged legitimate. The
critical point is not impugned.
Defenders of democracy have not been satisﬁed to establish
principles which license strong critical judgements against nondemocratic states. Their prime concern has been to show how
democratic values can be implemented in some measure, so they
have taken the route of examining the possibilities of representative institutions. Broadly, they have accepted the Hobbesian principle of identity of will between sovereign and people and have
sought to design institutions which preserve this. James Mill is the
clearest advocate of this strategy. Agreeing with Hobbes that the

312

DEMOCRACY

representatives will be self-interested, and accepting with Rousseau that this is a dangerous and corrupting tendency, he is
explicit that the central design problem is that of keeping the representatives on the straight and narrow path of promoting citizens’ interests, of establishing institutional conditions that will
ensure the coincidence of their own interests with those of their
constituents. This is ‘the doctrine of checks. It is sufﬁciently conformable to the established and fashionable opinions to say that
upon the right constitution of checks all goodness of government
depends.’20 The most important check is that of limited duration.
Representatives who realize that they will be replaced just as soon
as they cease to pursue the interests of their constituents will be
solicitous of those interests.
The thought that direct democracy is impossible in the modern
nation-state prompts the joint efforts of political theorists and
political scientists to seek out optimal representative institutions.
Noting that in practice there are almost as many representational
forms as there are nation-states, and recognizing that the number
is multiplied as soon as we take local government procedures
into account as well, and accepting that the unimplemented constitutional designs of theoreticians should be included in any
review, we shall abandon the task of examining models of representative institutions. This is just as well since the thought that
direct democracy is impossible in a modern nation-state needs
revisiting.
So far as many practicalities are concerned, Rousseau’s insistence that the republic be small (and his critics’ rejection of direct
democracy on that score) is evidently anachronistic. He was not
aware of the power of modern technology. If we thought that direct
democracy was the ideal form of political decision-making, we
could implement appropriate decision procedures swiftly enough.
We could give everyone a telephone and, if necessary a modem,
linked up to a central computer designed to register votes. If we
can run the Eurovision Song Contest in this way – no longer ‘Norway: nul points !’ – surely we can decide between political options
using similar methods. At any rate we can fairly assume that such
an exercise would be possible, were we to bend our wills to it.
It can fairly be objected that the procedures are still too sketchy
to focus sharply the philosophical question of whether we should

313

DEMOCRACY

implement a technologically driven direct democracy. Who would
set the agenda? How could they ensure that only two policies come
up for decision? (If there are more than two alternatives, there may
be no mathematically decisive way of ranking them.) Who would
control the executive as it puts policies into effect? Nonetheless,
we should not assume that answers cannot be found to settle these
questions, for it is certain that we have not begun to take them
seriously.21
So that we don’t get bogged down in technical perplexities, we
can focus the issues even more sharply. Some nations already have
a tradition of deciding many a political question by referendum,
the Swiss notably. Why shouldn’t we have more of it in the UK?
There is a tradition in the British parliament of taking votes on
questions which are recognized to raise matters of conscience out
of the arena of party dispute and giving members of parliament a
free vote unconstrained by party discipline. Capital punishment,
abortion legislation, fox-hunting – issues of these sorts have been
the subjects of free votes. How can democrats resist the claim that
such questions should be decided not by representatives but by the
people directly? The case is interesting because these are acknowledged to be issues raising moral concerns which should be isolated from party interest. Members of parliament who decide them
do, in Rousseauian fashion, consult their consciences. Only the
weaker members, or those with slender majorities, consult their
constituencies instead, and none, to my knowledge, polls them to
seek a mandate. More likely, they seek to ﬁnd out what local party
ofﬁcers or members favour, with a sharp eye to impending problems of reselection.
So far as I can see, the only objections to taking such decisions
by referendum concern the qualities of judgement likely to be
exercised by the general public compared with those of members
of parliament. It may be suggested that members of the public are
likely to be ignorant of crucial matters of fact; in the case of capital punishment for murder, for example, they may believe that this
works as a strong deterrent. Their ignorance may be reinforced by
the efforts of gifted orators (a.k.a. newspaper editors) who whip up
support with an eye to increased circulation or their proprietor’s
instructions. No doubt there are difﬁculties here, but no
doubt equally, many of them could be eased by the provision of

314

DEMOCRACY

information. What is interesting about such doubts is that they
reproduce just about exactly some of Plato’s arguments against
democracy as a mechanism of public decision-making. They suggest that arguments for representative forms in circumstances
where direct democracy is perfectly feasible are at bottom elitist.
The people, it is suggested, as against their representatives, are not
ﬁt to govern. To put the same point more politely, the people are
likely to govern less well than the representatives they appoint.
There is an oddity in this thought. Plato’s distrust of popular
decision-making fuelled his criticism of democracy and his
endorsement of rule by a self-perpetuating elite of philosopherkings. He would have distrusted representative democracy on
much the same grounds as he distrusted direct democracy: if citizens are too ignorant and easily swayed to make the correct policy
choices, how can we expect them to choose the best representatives? This would be akin to passengers on a cruise liner selecting
the captain as soon as they got on board – too many may select the
fellow they judge most charming to dine with. As soon as one
accepts that representatives working as professional politicians
have special skills which enable them to make better decisions
than their constituents would do if left to themselves, one is forced
to ask whether voting by the ignorant is the best way to select
them.22
The question may be less important than it seems. No representative system to my knowledge imposes entry qualiﬁcations on the
profession of representative politician, though theorists have proposed educational qualiﬁcations for the electorate. No regime
insists on a doctorate in economics or political science, or proﬁciency in a foreign language, or knowledge of the constitution, or
even spelling tests. Any potatoe (sic!) can aspire to be VicePresident of the United States. This is no bad thing. If, as I am
suggesting, democrats should recognize a problem in systems
which grant legislative powers to a sub-group of the population,
this problem would be exacerbated if qualiﬁcations other than
electability were required of representatives. The problem of the
ignorant selecting the wise or the crafty may in practice be solved,
as J.S. Mill saw, by the mechanisms of a political culture which
weed out clever rogues and charlatans, mechanisms, for example,
which select those with a record of public service. Political

315

DEMOCRACY

parties, for all their chicaneries and inﬁghting, can achieve similar results where the weight of party policy and accountability, as
well as requirements of personal integrity, inhibit strategies of
personal aggrandizement. That said, political culture is a precious
achievement. It is a miracle of political science that the major a
priori weakness of immature systems of representative democracy
– their liability to legitimize the power-seeking antics of nature’s
commissars – has been exposed in so few of the new democracies of
Eastern Europe.
If in the spirit of Rousseau we value democracy because of the
ways it advances citizens’ freedom and equality, we shall place a
particular premium on opportunities for citizens to participate in
ruling. We should not take it for granted that the efﬁciency which
is purchased by having decisions taken by a few people outweighs
the particular kinds of freedom and equality which direct democracy embodies. And yet we so often do. Experience shows us that
no sooner does any collective body set itself up for the pursuit of
some interest than a committee is formed to expedite the business.
We start off with a convener, a secretary, a treasurer; we add a few
members with special enthusiasm and expertise . . . and, ‘Hey
Presto!’, we have a decision-making body as well as a secretariat.
No group or club seems so small that it cannot establish a council,
executive, or assembly with powers to decide policy.
The practical objections to direct democracy look formidable,
and none are as weighty as the desire of subjects to have a quiet
time and leave the exercise of self-government to others. Who
wants to be casting votes in front of a television set every evening?
So the greatest danger is probably the tendency of citizens to show
respect for those of their fellows who have aspirations to leadership and to acquiesce deferentially in ploys to achieve unequal
decision-making power. The checks on the exercise of such powers
are rarely as effective as the resources representatives ﬁnd for circumventing them. It is against this background that citizens
should seek out every opportunity for taking decisions out of the
hands of representatives and placing them directly in the hands of
the community at large. Representation may often be necessary,
but that necessity very quickly becomes the occasion of collective
bad faith. To make a judgement on the issue which I raised at the
start of this discussion: I can think of plenty of reasons that may

316

DEMOCRACY

be offered for having free votes by representatives rather than
referenda involving all voters. All of them are working against the
core values of democracy.
I doubt whether it is a good reason for choosing representative
rather than direct democracy that those selected as represented
are wiser than a random sample of the population. Given the career paths of typical politicians, they are likely to be cleverer, I
suppose, and given the machinery that needs to be exploited in
order to become a representative, they are likely to be more adept
than most in the skills of personal manipulation and political
manouevring. They will certainly have a greater interest in political affairs and a stronger desire to exercise political power than
most of their fellows. They may well be more strongly motivated
towards public service. This is guesswork on my part, based on
limited personal experience. But whatever the distinctive personal
qualities (if any) of the political classes, we have no reason to
think they will get things right more frequently or more reliably
than other citizens faced with the same problems and given the
same information.
It is a feature of representative democracy that governments get
things wrong, spending much of their effort seeking solutions to
problems of their own causing. It is not a noticeable or striking
feature, because it is an inexorable characteristic of the modern
nation-state however constituted. No political system can get the
trains to run on time. Plato thought that a class of rulers – the
philosopher-kings – could be selected, educated and motivated to
govern successfully,23 an ancient version of the elite institutions of
the systems of higher education that have developed in France and
the United Kingdom over the last hundred and ﬁfty years and
supplied the state with most of its leading politicians and civil
servants. But there is no reason why anyone should believe him.
Politics may be a highly skilled craft, but government is not. It is
the most fallible of human activities; because its business is
change, it can’t settle down into good habits. This is the truth
behind conservative thinking: Utopia would be ruled, not by
philosopher-kings, but by prophets – but there aren’t any. ‘The
best Prophet naturally is the best guesser’,24 Hobbes cautions us
wisely. What the conservative gets wrong is the amount and
degree of change that is forced, so that resistance to change

317

DEMOCRACY

becomes just another active political stratagem, no less fallible
than any other.
I have been labouring the obvious in emphasizing the fallibility
of government. But this has not been without purpose, since despite Rousseau’s claims of infallibility, fallibility has been signposted as the distinctive failing of democracy. Everyone knows
that majorities can make mistakes, that a policy isn’t the correct
one just because a majority of citizens or representatives endorses
it, not least because everyone can think of examples of policies
which the majority supports and which are plain wrong. (Needless
to say, we won’t agree on any list of such political blunders.)
There are different reasons for this. Thus far I have suggested
that the major reason is ignorance of matters of fact, in particular
ignorance of the future, of how things will turn out. Many political debates are like this. They hinge on prediction and voters on
both sides of major issues decide on the basis of guesswork.
Everyone is either a prophet or a false prophet, since every voter is
a guesser.
A very different reason for the common judgement that majorities go wrong is that unsettled value conﬂicts are involved.
Should the state permit abortion, voluntary euthanasia, capital
punishment or the ritual slaughter of animals? Please add your
own candidate moral issue to the list. Let me add one from today’s
newspapers: should schoolteachers be able to give sex education
lessons to children which promote the social tolerance of homosexual behaviour? These appear to be questions which elicit fundamental moral disagreement. Of course, questions of these two
very different sorts get entangled. Prophecies concerning matters
of fact are adduced as decisive in what are at bottom conﬂicts of
values. We shall return later to the implications of deep moral
disagreement. For the moment, I want to emphasize that one of the
virtues of democracy is its ways of coping with errors.
If representatives err badly, for whatever reason, citizens can
vote them out and try a different bunch. If they are wise they will
apportion some measure of blame to themselves, the electorate,
and hope to learn something from their errors. In a direct democracy, citizens have only themselves to blame – which is a great
thing. The wider blame is spread and acknowledged the more
chance there is of a constructive response. By contrast, when the

318

DEMOCRACY

Five-Year Plans or the Great Leaps Forward, so favoured by gangs
of tyrants, go wrong, they either keep digging the same hole or
launch a hunt for plausible culprits, exacerbating the suffering.
Democracy is not infallible in the common-or-garden sense of the
term, but it has mechanisms for limiting the damage which should
be prized.

Democracy and majority tyranny
I have been drawing attention to the failures of government and
suggesting that although failure is ubiquitous, democracy is in a
better position than most systems to recoup the losses, and in any
case, citizens only have themselves to blame. This is an appropriate
point at which to re-examine what has been adduced as the distinctive failing of democracy – its capacity to exercise majority
tyranny. As we have seen, the tyranny of the majority was
remarked on by de Tocqueville in his study of Democracy in
America and was held to be of the ﬁrst importance by John Stuart
Mill in requiring a harm principle to protect citizens’ liberties.
The phenomenon demands careful description.
One who votes in a democratic procedure is expected to abide by
the result even if their cause is defeated. They are in a minority but
the majority has the day. They must conform to the winning policy
although they voted against it. They may be forced to comply with
the decision of the majority. This not tyranny; it is just defeat.
Those who are defeated should look forward to their next
opportunity for decision-making. They may then ﬁnd themselves in
a majority, and depending on the issue at stake in the voting – a
representative, a government, a speciﬁc policy – they may be able to
reverse the decision which went against them on the ﬁrst occasion.
An important assumption behind the practice of majority
decision-making is that ‘You win some; you lose some’. Most citizens can expect to be in a majority on a majority of occasions,
although it is technically possible (but unlikely) that things may
work out differently if a large consolidated minority can succeed
in attracting just sufﬁcient unattached (but different) voters to tip
them into a majority most of the time. This is an important
assumption, since if a signiﬁcant minority of citizens thought that

319

DEMOCRACY

their participation never gained a result, they would be unlikely to
regard democracy as securing the political liberty of selfgovernment or being the enactment of political equality.
Majority rule does not entail majority tyranny. Majority tyranny is most conspicuously witnessed in a society which is riven by
antecedent divisions:
Suppose the majority to be whites, the minority negroes, or vice
versa; is it likely that the majority would allow equal justice to
the minority? Suppose the majority Catholics, the minority
Protestants, or the reverse; will there not be the same danger?
Or let the majority be English, the minority Irish, or the
contrary; is there not a great probability of similar evil?25
Mill’s continuation is disappointing because the division which
worries him most is the class division of rich and poor, and in
Representative Government he fails to take up the problem in the
manner in which it is posed in On Liberty. It is certain that the
contours of the problem are more familiar to ourselves than they
were to Mill, given the adoption (or imposition) of broadly democratic regimes in many societies (often postcolonial or postwar
settlements) which have strong racial, ethnic or religious divisions. Where such divisions are ﬁrmly in place, democracy can
entrench them further. The majority party will consider proposals
in the light of whether they promote the interests of their group,
whether they damage the interests of a group to which they are
hostile, often both of these together. The agenda of politics may be
manipulated so that issues which are of no interest to the majority
rarely arise for discussion and decision. The minority will be permanent and impotent. Worse still, the majority will more recognizably act like a tyrant if it promotes policies or enacts legislation
that violate the rights or liberties of members of the minority
community. This is the modern phenomenon of the tyranny of the
majority, and sadly, it is a staple of current affairs.
The problem that worried Mill in On Liberty was subtly different. He believed, accepting de Tocqueville’s sociological study of
America, that when all citizens regard each other as equals, a
spirit of conformity will develop from the uniformity of power and
status. Citizens will take a close interest in each other’s character

320

DEMOCRACY

and habits as displayed even in the sphere of private life and be
disposed to change through prohibition personal qualities of
which they disapprove. Indeed, if the forces of conformity are
strong enough, prohibition will hardly be needed. Citizens will be
anxious to conform and even the odd, bloody-minded eccentric will
be vulnerable to social pressures. For Mill, the tyranny of the
majority was a product of self-reinforcing homogeneity rather
than division. The threat to liberty is the greater the more deeply
the spirit of democracy suffuses the decision-making institutions
of a society. If there is democracy all the way down, from Parliament or Congress to community council and town meeting, the
tendency towards busy intervention in pursuit of conformity will
be strengthened.
How real are these threats? How far do they compromise the
ideals of democracy? Let us discuss them in turn. The ﬁrst type of
majority tyranny, which is caused by antecedently formed social
divisions, is very serious indeed. In fact the problem for democracy
may be worse than I have suggested since democracy may serve as
the mechanism for quickening as much as expressing social conﬂict. One explanation of the incredible surfacing of internecine
hatreds in the territory of the former Yugoslavia is that the
politicians who emerged from the ruins of Tito’s regime found it
impossible to carve out competing political manifestos within the
available space of political dispute without bringing back to life
religious and cultural divisions that many citizens had forgotten,
or in the case of the young, barely experienced. (It has been
claimed that over twenty-ﬁve per cent of marriages in Bosnia were
mixed marriages between citizens of different faiths.) This did not
prevent aspirant politicians in pursuit of a constituency calling up
old hatreds in order to gain electoral support and then cultivating
those hatreds to the point of civil war when that was judged necessary for political success. I accept that the details of the case are
disputed and would not wish to defend this interpretation of
events from a standpoint of ignorance. But the point should be
clear: democracy can be a powerful source of the sort of strife that
the state is supposed to adjudicate and resolve.
Such examples would not have fazed Rousseau. They are after
all the consequence of the sort of representative institutions that
he held in contempt and would amount to yet another reason for

321

DEMOCRACY

promoting direct democracy. As we have seen, he was hostile to all
parties and factions and would have banished sectional organizations from his republic. His citizens do not consult religious or
cultural leaders; they appeal merely to their own hearts, to a conscience that does not recognize partial group interests. This is
interesting, but hopeless for the democrat who wishes to defend
some form of representative institution.
But Rousseau has another argument which should be of wider
appeal. We should remember that democracy is an ideal but not a
value. It is an ideal precisely because it actualizes the prudential
requirement of self-concern together with the (complex) moral
values of liberty and equality. He himself recognizes one source of
the problem we have been addressing and points towards a solution. Citizens, he emphasizes, accept ‘the total alienation of each
associate, together with all his rights, to the community . . . each
gives himself absolutely . . . the alienation being without reserve’.26
In this respect he is as absolutist as Hobbes. But this de jure absolutism is far from tyranny, since, as we have seen, each subject, in
effect, cedes to the sovereign only the rights the sovereign deems it
important to control. What looks to be a contradiction is disarmed
because the sovereign is the whole body of citizens and the general
will of the sovereign is directed towards the maintenance of equality and the protection of each person’s liberty. What would be a
contradiction would be to suppose that citizens whose strong
value of liberty includes a concern for civil liberty would put that
liberty under threat, that citizens who value the equality of all
could tolerate the powerlessness of a minority of fellow citizens.
One true lesson of Rousseau’s doctrine of the general will is that
democracy is not merely a decision procedure, it is a way of taking
decisions informed by speciﬁc values shared by all citizens. If it
becomes the vehicle of particular sectional interests, it is ‘acting
no longer as a Sovereign, but as a magistrate’27 and its decisions no
longer carry authority.
It has often been claimed that democracy can institutionalize
the structure of values which justify it in so far as they express the
general will. What is necessary is that we ‘distinguish clearly
between the respective rights of the citizens and the Sovereign,
and between the duties the former have to fulﬁl as subjects, and
the natural rights they should enjoy as men’.28 The standard

322

DEMOCRACY

constitutional means of effecting this distinction (as against the
moral constraint of a harm principle) is to identify natural or
human rights and entrench these in a Bill of Rights which effectively constrains the citizens along the track of respecting rights
and liberties. Such a procedure is unobjectionable if the Bill of
Rights operates as a statement of principle, a standing reminder of
(some of) the principles of association which comprise the general
will. If we think of a Bill of Rights as something like the preamble
to all legislation, as a mission statement, to use the jargon, for
communities and their legislatures to adopt, its use will be clear
and no democrat could object. Subscription to international
statements of human rights has worked in this fashion, as have
international courts of human rights wherein adverse judgements
are viewed as political embarassments rather than the striking
down of legislation. It is a different story if the Bill of Rights is a
constitutional device which opens up decisions of the democratic
legislature to judicial review, for now we have the prospect of
democratic decisions being overturned by judges.
The objections to this process are perfectly straightforward. It
transfers debates about rights and liberties, debates which we can
expect to be endemic, from a democratic forum to a courtroom.
Decisions will be made by judges who are often selected rather
than elected, and who may well exhibit views characteristic of a
particular class or gender or ethnic background. Judges will often
disagree amongst themselves for reasons which reproduce the
leading features of popular debate and then they will generally
settle the question by majority decision. ‘The citizens may well feel
that if disagreements on these matters are to be settled by counting heads, then it is their heads or those of their accountable representatives that should be counted.’29 A self-conﬁdent democracy
should not need to hand over some of its most important decisions
to a self-selecting profession.
On the other hand, Bills of Rights and processes of judicial
review may be vitally important in political cultures which do
threaten majority tyranny because of deep antecedent social divisions or, indeed the pressure to conformity. Legislators may fear an
unholy alliance of media campaigns and popular prejudice and
simply avoid decision-making in controversial areas where they
reckon a moral majority may take offence. Judges, who do not fear

323

DEMOCRACY

future elections and who have to decide only on the cases brought
before them, may turn out to be the only persons willing to assert
individuals’ rights where the status quo is oppressive. On the other
hand, the availability of a judiciary to take such decisions may
well encourage politicians to avoid public discussion in areas of
controversy concerning citizens’ liberties.
This is not an issue to be settled here, but before we leave it it
would be useful to remind ourselves how far the political world we
are describing is distanced from the republic of Rousseau’s Social
Contract. The citizens he envisages may well disagree on the minutiae of what their rights require by way of legislation, but their
disputes would be informed by a common concern for liberty and
equality. Critics of Rousseau are on stronger ground when they
consider the threats to liberty from the tendency towards
conformity.
It is a strange convergence of opinions that John Stuart Mill and
Rousseau agree on a leading feature of the social psychology of
democracy. Rousseau’s utopian republic is a strange, and for many,
an abhorrent place. There are no lively discussions or lengthy
debates, or, if there are, these indicate the (inevitable) degeneration of the institution. On matters of the highest importance, it is
supposed that there will be near unanimity amongst the electorate.
Rousseau is almost Platonic in his disgust for eloquence and the
political arts. He supposes deep agreement about values and is
disposed to recommend institutions like the civil religion which
reinforces that consensus. (Critics of Rousseau are right to
deplore these tendencies. It is unlikely that he thought of the civil
religion as a version of the Church of England, a unique sociological achievement which effected conformity through its ubiquity together with the emptiness of its theological commitment.
The Church of England does not advocate the death penalty for
convicted hypocrites or apostates – Rousseau does.30) When Rousseau’s citizens decide what legislation to enact, they listen, not to
each other, but to the voice of conscience speaking to them as they
contemplate the issues, and conscience says much the same to each
of them.
This quality of consensus of beliefs about values is recognized
by Mill as the effect of democracy, rather than the condition of
its success. In effect, as they used to say, Mrs Grundy rules.

324

DEMOCRACY

Eccentricity and idiosyncracy vanish as the hard edges of beliefs
in conﬂict are rubbed away. Democracy levels down and dumbs
down, Mill might have said. These processes he saw as the
inevitable downside of democracy and they necessitated a lively
apprehension of the harm principle if they were to be kept in
check.
It is just as well that both Rousseau and Mill were wrong.
Democracy does not need the rigid and stiﬂing homogeneity that
Rousseau described in order to ﬂourish and it need not produce
the conformity Mill deplored. To establish these points, we need to
recognize that democracy assumes both agreement and disagreement. It assumes disagreement since, at the limit, if everyone were
agreed about what is the right way to behave, barring weakness of
will and tricky co-ordination problems, there would be no need of a
state at all. Moral disagreement is the evident reality of modern
states and moral disagreement is quickly transformed into political dispute as conﬂicting parties seek to coerce or neutralize the
opposing point of view. Democracy assumes agreement with
respect to the principles that vindicate it as the best decision procedure (roughly, liberty and equality, as outlined above) and it can
fairly presuppose agreement on exactly the same principles when
they are germane to the settling of disputes.
There is an old philosophical problem in the ofﬁng here, and its
persistence in generating practical problems arouses lively debate
about the limits of toleration within a democracy. This surfaces
most conspicuously when anti-democratic parties put themselves
up for election or when those who would limit freedom of speech
and association demand the opportunity to campaign publicly and
collectively for these objectives. No doubt stable democracies can,
in practice, tolerate a good deal of such anti-democratic behaviour.
It may be a correct judgement that a public display of idiotic
beliefs is not likely to gain them support whereas suppression will
do more harm than good. But these are matters of ﬁne political
judgement rather than philosophical principle. So far as philosophical principles are concerned, the assertion of rights to equal
political powers does not entail that equal political powers should
be granted to those who advocate stripping some members of the
community of the opportunity to participate. A representative
democracy should have a clear eye to the dangers of constitutional

325

DEMOCRACY

subversion carried by different schemes of representation in particular political circumstances. It is well known (but the lesson
was recently re-learned in France) that systems of proportional
representation which are likely to grant representative status to a
small minority of anti-democrats may undermine the application
of the very principles that are used to defend them. If, for example,
there exist parties which advocate the repatriation of immigrant
citizens, or any variety of religious or racial discrimination, a
democracy should seek opportunistic remedies to defend its founding principles. It is worth remembering that democracy is not itself
a value. Its characteristic practices are justiﬁed only to the degree
that they express and promote the values of liberty and equality. If,
in speciﬁc circumstances, democratic processes threaten these
values, constitutional change that can protect and strengthen
them should be implemented.

Democracy, deliberation and disagreement
The Rousseauian perspective that we have been exploring and
modifying stresses agreement with respect to the basic principles
which motivate the adoption of a democratic constitution and further agreement concerning the application of those principles in
the processes of decision-making. Rousseau assumes that the
foundational principles will yield a right answer to questions
brought forward for decision and he believes that a majority of
right-thinking citizens will register that right answer as required
by the general will. In what follows, I want to examine two criticisms of these assumptions. The ﬁrst concerns the space for disagreement; the second concerns the mechanisms of citizens’
deliberations.
Rousseau’s citizens recognize prudential goods, and recognize,
too, that fellow citizens have similar prudential concerns which
deserve their respect. They value liberty in the domains of autonomy, civil liberty and political participation. They value equality
of political power, rough material equality and the equality
enshrined in the rule of law. For Rousseau, this characterizes a
powerful measure of agreement. I propose that universal acceptance of these values is just as readily seen as a recipe for

326

DEMOCRACY

widespread disagreement. Disagreement is possible in the following circumstances, amongst others:
(1) A policy decision may affect the self-interest of different citizens in different fashions when nothing else is at stake. The
council wishes to build a road bypassing a village. Farmer A to
the north of the village would like the road to cross his land so
that he can sell up for a favourable price. Farmer B, having land
to the south of the village, disagrees. He would like to sell up,
too, looking forward to retirement on the basis of his compensation payments. Farmers C and D, to the north and south of
the village respectively, disagree with their immediate neighbours because they do not want the land they farm to be
covered in asphalt.
(2) A policy dispute may concern the general welfare. Citizens who
may or may not have a personal stake in the outcome may differ
in their judgement of the consequences of alternative policies
in point of welfare. Should the country protect a nascent
industry by the application of favourable tariffs? Two economists disagree as to the likely effects – one predicting retaliation which will cause irrecoverable damage to export
industries, the other believing that long-term gains will
outweigh the imminent costs.
(3) Citizens may broadly agree on speciﬁc elements of the value
conspectus but disagree on the contents or applicability of the
constituent principles. They may agree on the importance of
civil liberty, yet disagree over whether e.g. the right to private
property is an element of it. (Indeed this is one of the great
problems of political philosophy since many believe, following
Hegel, that freedom is the most plausible justiﬁcation of private property. Philosophers who discuss distributive justice
without examining the basis of private property sweep it under
the carpet. Rawls is a conspicuous example.) Or they may agree
on the importance of a particular liberty, but disagree on the
application of the principle. Accepting the importance of freedom of expression, citizens may disagree as to whether this
licenses the sale of pornography. Accepting the importance of
religious freedom, citizens may differ as to the legitimacy of
forced marriages or ritual animal slaughter.

327

DEMOCRACY

(4) Elements of the complex value of liberty may conﬂict with
each other. Citizens who value liberty in each of these forms
may disagree when conﬂicts between different aspects of liberty arise. That measure of autonomy which is gained through
mechanisms of social self-control may infringe civil liberties.
Paternalist policies may be an example of this. Prudent but
weak-willed citizens will endorse them. Strong-willed libertarians will dissent. Civil liberties, as we have seen, may be compromised by majority decisions taken by citizens exercising
rights of political participation. Citizens may disagree on the
best policy to adopt in these circumstances, whether to accept
the cost in liberty or restrain the powers of the majority.
(5) Conﬂicts between liberty in its different forms and commitment to the different types of equality will be endemic, particularly if private property is included amongst the list of civil
liberties. Liberty to dispose of earned income may not be the
noblest cause, as we saw when discussing Nozick’s views on
taxation, but it should carry some weight in our deliberations.
Policies which limit contributions to political parties and, in
compensation, direct government funds to party organizations,
doubly constrain liberty in the pursuit of equality of political
power.31 Policies which enforce the disclosure of sources of
party funding (common democratic wisdom in the United
States, but a novelty in the United Kingdom) are deemed to
offend privacy in the service of political equality according to
spokesmen for the Conservative Party. Since each of the conﬂicting views in these debates is not obviously ridiculous, we
can expect citizens who subscribe to the conﬂicting values to
take different views on how the conﬂict is to be resolved.
(6) The values of liberty and equality will conﬂict (again,
endemically) with both prudential values and general welfare.
Readers are invited to give their own examples.
All of the disagreements we have considered so far have been
based on conﬂicts within, because between the elements of, Rousseau’s value consensus. They could be solved if there was an
explicit ordering of these values, but I see none, other than the
submergence of prudential (particular) interests under the direction of the general will, nor any prospect of a systematic ordering

328

DEMOCRACY

in the face of unﬂinching and conscientious contrary intuitions.
Fundamental disagreement is the fate of even those who agree to a
prospectus of values which is promoted as a list of independently
justiﬁable principles. No doubt hard philosophical work can
reduce the possibilities of conﬂict – and we have tried to advance
this prospect in our discussions of liberty and distributive justice –
but the likelihood of a plausible and practically implementable
synthesis of all good things should not be judged promising, as
Isaiah Berlin insisted.32
The potential for disagreement concerning policies which
demand legislation, or, by default, endorsement of the status quo,
is magniﬁed as soon as we consider controversies which do not
engage the political values we have canvassed thus far. As philosophers, we know that disagreement over the legitimacy of abortion is likely to be premissed (in part) on such values as the sanctity
(or otherwise) of human life or moral personhood as embodied in
the foetus, that disagreement over capital punishment reﬂects a
contested valuation of the evil of the irremedial punishment of
the innocent, that disagreement over voluntary euthanasia is
based on differing judgements over the locus and subjects of
rational consent. We cannot force debates about these issues,
which demand political resolution by way of a judgement as to
the permissibilty or illegality of alternative actions, into the
strait-jacket of the general will where that has the content that
Rousseau prescribed.
Disagreement, we have found, is endemic even amongst those
who agree on political principles. It is deepened when we acknowledge a range of moral problems which cannot be isolated from the
political process, since partisans of the moral views in conﬂict
demand that the regime either permit or forbid the actions in dispute. Disagreement is judged to be even more pervasive when the
moral conﬂict which grounds political disagreement is the product
of religious or cultural differences.
We have been contesting Rousseau’s assumption that political
differences can be resolved by the application of agreed political
principles and have noticed that disagreement in respect of fundamental moral principles cannot be bracketed from the political
process. If we look beyond the staples of philosophical controversy
to the reality of life in the modern nation-state, we see that the

329

DEMOCRACY

position, in point of disagreement, is even worse. We ﬁnd that the
modern nation-state is a multicultural phenomenon, either
because a political settlement has integrated distinctive historical
cultures into a contingent political unity, or because patterns of
immigration have introduced alien cultures into a previously
monocultural state, or, most likely, because over time both of these
processes have been working together. Where, as in the United
States, the dominant culture is that of the immigrants, we ﬁnd
competing metacultural ideologies, commending on the one hand,
the ‘melting-pot’, an integrative process whereby prior allegiances
are dissolved through common acceptance of a novel social
settlement, on the other hand, multiculturalism, wherein the
distinctive constituent cultures are to be preserved as valuable
contributory elements of a dynamically innovative way of life.
Whatever the historical story, whatever the metacultural establishment or controversy, we can expect that the sociological reality
will reveal moral differences which are ineliminable. If, as is
usual, they are based on differences of religious belief which
cultural ancestry imports, the moral disagreements will often be
aggressively divisive.
Disagreement may come about because of value pluralism,
where folks agree about a range of values but not how they should
be ordered or applied in conditions of conﬂict, and value difference, where there is conﬂict on seemingly basic ethical commitments.33 Incredibly, given his idiosyncratic views on all manner of
ethical issues, ranging from the proper education of children to
the regulation of the theatre, and his quick sense of persecution
from those of opposing views, Rousseau never sensed the implications of his stance as a self-acknowledged controversialist – such
was his assurance that he was right. But on the bottom line he was
wrong. Democracy is not the ratiﬁcation of agreement so much as
the means of resolving disagreement.
This immediately raises a problem, since no one believes (or no
one should believe) that in matters of controversy of the sort I have
described moral disputes are settled by counting heads. Democratic processes give us a decision rather than a deﬁnitive answer
to a tricky question. Put to one side the thought, which Rousseau
would have endorsed, that there must be a right answer to disputes
about matters of moral principle. (We can agree with him that

330

DEMOCRACY

there must be; in which case we should be humble about our capacity for reaching it. We can disagree for all sorts of respectable
philosophical reasons. Either way, the problem of ethical objectivity can be bracketed.) If democratic procedures are not to serve as
tests of rectitude in decision-taking (though to give Rousseau his
due, they may witness good intentions – to serve the general will),
what is their point in a world of conspicuous disagreement?
The most straightforward justiﬁcation of democracy in the face
of disagreement is that offered by the utilitarians. As we saw above
and in Chapter 1, in its simpliﬁed Benthamite form, this requires
each citizen to work out which of alternative policies suits them
best and then to register their preference in a ballot, overall satisfaction being maximized by a majority decision. If all that is stake
is the self-interest of the contesting parties, this method looks reasonable. Imagine a village which has received a bequest of £200,000
from a local worthy on condition that it be used for the provision
of sporting facilities. Two proposals emerge; villagers can afford
the construction of a swimming pool or a gymnasium, but not
both. It is hard to think of any satisfactory way of settling the
dispute other than by taking a majority decision. It is hard to
think of any considerations other than self-interest that might
contribute to the villagers’ deliberations.
Put to one side the general theoretical questions which utilitarianism raises. Practical disagreements of the sort characterized
by this example call for preferences to be consulted and aggregated
in accordance with the mathematics of the ballot box. In which
case, we can generalize the problem and consider whether all disagreements of the kinds we have distinguished can be resolved in
this fashion. There are strong reasons for believing we cannot.
Anne, Betty and Christine all agree on the importance of freedom
of speech, and all agree that freedom of speech is necessary for the
preservation of the democracy they prize. They have to decide
whether the National Fascist Party should be allowed to meet in
the village hall. Although they each of them detest the views of
the NFP, they disagree over whether the planned meetings pose a
threat to the values to which they subscribe. This is a reasonable
disgreement, and we can all reconstruct the leading points of the
debate they conduct. Perhaps one or other of them changes their
mind in the course of discussion, but they still do not reach a

331

DEMOCRACY

consensus. At the end, they settle the matter in the only way
available to them as democrats – they vote.
The utilitarian would represent the decision process as one
wherein the voters register their preferences. Finding that Betty
and Christine agree that the meetings should go ahead, Anne dissenting, the outcome is reported as optimal because two of them
are suited by it, one of them not. The oddity of this analysis of the
proceedings is that none of them believed that they were registering their preferences; neither of the winning pair sought the satisfaction which the victory in the ballot produced. What both of
them sought was the freedom which they judged should be permitted the NFP. Likewise with Anne the loser: her concern was not to
avoid the dissatisfaction which the ballot produced; it was to prevent the meeting. We can quite understand all the parties acknowledging the satisfaction and dissatisfaction attributed to them, yet
insisting that this played no role whatsoever in the decisionmaking process (how could it?) and is irrelevant to judging the
outcome. They don’t care about their state of mind when this is put
in the balance with the success or otherwise of their policy proposals in the light of what they judged their values required. In
which case, it is misleading or philosophically misjudged to
identify the value of the solution they reach by the employment
of a democratic procedure with the balance of satisfaction over
dissatisfaction which is derived.
To reinforce this conclusion, think of the psychological
strangeness of one who votes in order to achieve the satisfaction of
being on the winning side. Such a person would evaluate alternatives not in accordance with their intrinsic merits but in respect of
their probability of success. She would be in the curious position
of the football fan who shifts her allegiance to whichever side she
predicts will be on top of the league. She would be asking which
policy is most likely to gain majority support so that she can position herself adroitly. Curiously, if Anne thought like this and
knew that Betty and Christine disagreed with each other, she
would be delighted. She could toss a coin and still be assured of
the satisfactions of success. The thought of all three of them trying to second-guess each others’ moves in order to ﬁnd at least one
ally is plainly preposterous.
We know, as a matter of fact, that many voters do not consider

332

DEMOCRACY

their self-interest when they vote in elections or referendums.
Indeed it is wise of them not to do so. As we noticed above, if they
are clear-sightedly self-interested they would not vote at all as
members of a large electorate. They vote because voting expresses
their sense of themselves as active citizens who participate with
the moral purpose of expressing their values in a decision-making
forum. A democratic forum enables them to claim respect and recognize others as free and equal. They do not see it as a vehicle for
achieving the satisfaction of their desires, and hence would not
justify it in these terms. Again, as a matter of fact, Rousseau’s
account of the general will ﬁts the rationale for voters’ behaviour
that we have reconstructed. Even if it were true that majority
decisions maximize voter satisfaction, and thereby welfare or utility, this would present a justiﬁcation for voter behaviour that most
voters would disavow – and not because they are ignorant of their
own purposes or state of mind.
This conclusion is not decisive against utilitarianism, since the
utilitarian can detach the aims or motivation of those who engage
in a practice from the justiﬁcation of that practice. They will urge,
plausibly, general claims to the effect that democracies do not suffer famine nor go to war with each other. They may seek to justify
the foundational values of democracy, freedom and equality, in
utilitarian terms. What they cannot claim is that direct utilitarian
reasoning can vindicate the outcome of all democratic decisions.
The satisfaction of the winners is too short-term a phenomenon to
register strongly in the scales. It may well turn sour if it turns out
that the defeated minority were right on a crucial factual issue.
I do not wish to claim that there is no place for utilitarian reasoning in the practices of democracy. As we have seen there may be
policy issues where the self-interest of the voters is the only thing
that is at stake. It may well be true that more issues should be
settled by this sort of calculation than conventional civic virtue
dictates. We would often be better off keeping a narrow focus on
our own interests or those of our constituency, and constructing
coalitions of like-minded self-seekers rather than succumbing to
appeals on behalf of a nebulous common good, especially, pace
Rousseau, when the decision-making group is small. (This is my
dismal experience of the politics of university administration, having listened to too many eloquent appeals that one should ignore

333

DEMOCRACY

narrow departmental concerns and address the wider interests of
the Faculty or the University as a whole.) The poor, the
unemployed, the ill-paid and the sick would do better from
national governments if they could co-ordinate effectively to
pursue self-interested agendas.
We can listen sympathetically when the utilitarian tells us, in
the case of democracy as of other values (rights, liberty, justice),
that he is going back to the drawing-board to ﬁnd deeper, subtler
arguments or, what is needed most of all, some convincing facts.
Let us move on to consider alternative accounts of democracy as
the optimal method of solving the disagreements that inevitably
arise from moral pluralism and moral difference.
In recent years, a neo-Rousseauian movement has emerged
under the label of ‘deliberative democracy’.34 Deliberative democracy moves beyond Rousseau in the speciﬁc respect that it is
premised on the fact of disagreement, and so instead of modelling
the reﬂections of solitary thinkers who work out what conscience
demands, emphasizes the necessity of social processes which allow
citizens to come to terms with their disagreements, to ﬁnd agreement or to settle the differences pro tem as practical exigencies
dictate.
In a sense, as I have already claimed, the fact of disagreement is
an obvious premiss of democracy. If everyone agreed in respect of
values and preferences and their respective and comparative
orderings and if all judgements were based on the same available
basis of factual information there would be little to dispute and
nothing to decide. But as we have seen, there are plenty of sources
of disagreement, hence plenty of practical political disputes
which need to be settled. This problem is judged more serious in
the modern world because of the fact of reasonable pluralism.
Reasonable pluralism is a sociological phenomenon with religious
and philosophical roots. The term itself derives, to my knowledge,
from John Rawls who uses it to characterize the variety of what he
describes as comprehensive doctrines which citizens may reasonably avow.35
Deliberative democracy is a process of seeking consensus
amongst parties who disagree on values and policy yet agree that
the pursuit of agreement is the only way forward, that conﬂict
must be resolved through mechanisms of collective deliberation.

334

DEMOCRACY

When consensus is not possible (which surely must be just about
all of the time) the second-best resolution is achieved by using
some system of majority voting. Deliberative democracy is a useful
idea because it focuses attention on procedures other than majority voting. In particular, it directs us to the nature and quality of
the arguments that are to be employed in the process of settling
disagreement, to the claims parties to the discussion can fairly
make on their own behalf, and to the claims of others that they
must reciprocally respect.
Parties to the deliberative process are free and equal, just as
Rousseau insisted, although the kinds of freedom and equality
differ from his in their different speciﬁcations by different writers.
In what follows I shall assume conventional values of freedom and
equality since these can be adapted to the requirements of social
deliberation. Thus free citizens should be able to put issues on a
social agenda for decision, should have wide freedom of speech to
advance their causes, should be able to associate with each other
in pursuit of their objectives, as well as participate as equals in the
deliberative process. The key to these processes is what Gutmann
and Thompson describe as reciprocity. In seeking fair terms of
social co-operation, citizens ‘offer reasons that can be accepted by
others who are similarly motivated to ﬁnd reasons that can be
accepted by others’.36 Public debate is a matter of seeking out
principles which are shared by parties who disagree about other
things and then using this common fund of values to settle the
differences. Sometimes – proponents of deliberative democracy
tend to be optimistic about these things – the magic works. The
Protestant accepts that the Catholic will never accept his religious
beliefs, the Catholic acknowledges that the Protestant will never
accept hers. Neither of them will be able to procure the salvation
of the other, but both can be led to see the importance to each of
them of being able to confess their creed. And on the basis of this
agreement, they can agree further not to burn down each other’s
churches or attempt forced conversion, accepting a principle of
religious liberty and promoting a policy of religious toleration. On
other occasions the magic does not work, consensus is not reached.
Pro-life and pro-choice opponents over the question of abortion
may bracket off their religious differences but still ﬁnd that
they disagree over the moral status of foetal life. At this point,

335

DEMOCRACY

respecting each others’ different points of view amounts to a
commitment to adopt a decision procedure which respects their
freedom and equality (democracy) and to abide by the majority
view – whether it is to permit or forbid abortion.
One proponent of deliberative democracy, Joshua Cohen, claims
that democracy itself is ‘a fundamental political ideal and not
simply . . . a derivative ideal that can be explained in terms of the
values of fairness or equality of respect’.37 We can see why this
view is mistaken. Deliberative (and all other?) conceptions of
democracy sit on the back of principles of freedom and equality;
these may be spelled out in the manner of our reading of Rousseau
or they may themselves be derived from deeper intuitions concerning autonomy, equality of respect and a conception of the common
good. Such principles are put to work at two stages in the dialectic:
ﬁrst, in deriving the procedural norms which comprise the democratic deliberation and decision procedure, second, in establishing
the values which direct arguments and furnish decisions when the
democracy is operative.
I recall an old chestnut examination question: ‘Is democracy
merely a political decision-making procedure?’. We can see clearly
now why the answer is ‘No’. The principles which serve to generate
the procedure, making democratic decisions a fair basis for systems of social co-operation and coercive regulation, also serve to
govern the conduct of debate and the justiﬁcation of decisions.
They constitute ‘public reason’, again Rawls’s term,38 demarcating
a stock of principles to which all may be deemed to subscribe and
which thereby constrain the terms of the public debates engaged
by those who seek to settle disagreement on terms everyone can
accept. They mark the premisses from which arguments in the
public forum must proceed if they are to secure the acceptance of
those to whom they are directed. Public reason should be instantly
recognizable as a contemporary version of Rousseau’s general
will.
Does deliberative democracy resolve the problem of disagreement? The ﬁrst point to notice is that we cannot expect all citizens
to accept it as a basis for settling conﬂict, since it is evident that
not all citizens accept the values on which the ideal is constructed.
Once again the liberal encounters the usual culprits – those
whose religious or philosophical views lead them to deny the

336

DEMOCRACY

foundational values, however unspeciﬁed or provisional these may
be considered. Gutmann and Thompson describe a group of parents who objected to a basic reading text adopted by the board of
education in Hawkins County, Tennessee, on the basis that the
reading material conﬂicted with some of their Christian fundamentalist convictions.39 Amongst the offending passages was one
that described ‘a central idea of the Renaissance as “a belief in the
dignity and worth of human beings,” because such a belief is
incompatible with true religious faith’ (this is Burns’s Holy Willie
speaking up again). As Gutmann and Thompson argue, ‘the parents’ reasoning appeals to values that can and should be rejected
by citizens of a pluralist society committed to protecting the basic
liberties and opportunities of all citizens’. But of course the
objecting parents do not acknowledge a reasonable plurality of
ethical beliefs, and, denying the dignity and worth of human
beings, they are unlikely to value the protection of basic liberties
and opportunities of all citizens.
Straight off we can see that there will be irresolvable conﬂicts
with those who do not think that the search for agreement is
worthwhile or do not believe that it demands more than active
proselytizing. There will be irresolvable conﬂicts with those who
dismiss the foundational values of freedom or equality as inconsistent with revealed doctrine. We can call such divisive moral perspectives unreasonable on the grounds that their proponents have
no interest in resolving the conﬂicts their beliefs cause. But then
they would call the deliberative democrat unreasonable because
she cannot acknowledge the only basis on which they believe
agreement could be constructed – endorsement of the revealed
truth. Deliberative democracy has to recognize that neither its
procedures nor the currency of its policy debates can command
the acceptance of all elements of the moral plurality to which it
commends itself.
The persistence within the polity of individuals and groups who
just do not accept the founding values of democracy, values as
fundamental as equal respect and freedom for independent
judgement, would be more of an embarassment if we were not comfortable with the claim that such views are plain wrong. It is a
weakness, not a strength, of their positions that they do not grant
opposing views even the logical space for an argument with them,

337

DEMOCRACY

if they systematically disbar any attempt to seek common ground
beyond the literal acceptance of their claims.
So far as I can see, there are only three ways of dealing with
serious disagreement concerning policy or principle. First, one
can seek substantive agreement, ﬁnding arguments which force or
seduce one of the opposing parties into changing their mind. Failing that, and accepting that the scale of the disagreement may be
much reduced if not altogether eliminated by concerted deliberation, the parties may ﬁnd sufﬁcient agreement to accept a decision procedure. Turn-and-turn-about or tossing a coin may serve
for couples who wish to go out with each other but systematically
disagree over whether to go to a concert or a play. Some form of
democracy is the only realistic political equivalent. Failing agreement on procedures, the parties must ﬁght, seeking a dominant
position which enables them to impose their judgement on
continually recalcitrant opponents.
As Hobbes saw, ﬁghting will be endemic where parties to
irresolvable conﬂicts are roughly equal or equally vulnerable to
shifting alliances. The best we can wish for, in a world where the
prospect of ﬁghting is not so much the nightmare scenario as the
condition of conﬂict portrayed regularly on the TV news, is that
our own societies have a powerful enough majority committed to
the resolution of disputes by majority decision where substantive
agreement cannot be achieved. Then, paradoxically, they can
impose by coercion decisions which the commitment to agreement
at some level cannot secure.
It has been useful to identify the limitations of democracy in
point of the ineliminability of ﬁrst-water, ground-level disagreement and to establish that its credentials will not be established to
the satisfaction of all parties to all conﬂicts. The democrat as well
as the tyrant has to display his credentials even as he accepts that
not all will accept them. He needs to be able to display his ethical
commitments even when he knows they will be rejected. His saving
grace – and it is a real grace, of character and manners as well as
conduct – is that he attributes to his opponents an equality of
respect, if not quite liberty, that they would refuse to him.
Does deliberative democracy fare any better as a response to
other sources of disagreement? I categorized earlier value pluralism as that condition wherein citizens agree on a list of values but

338

DEMOCRACY

disagree as to their respective priorities, either in general or in
respect of their applicability to different circumstances where a
judgement of priorities is required. Betty and Alf can agree that
liberty and equality are important values, but Alf insists that liberty trumps equality whereas Bert disagrees. Christine and Denis
may have no views as to the systematic ordering of these values,
but in respect of rights to private property, Christine may believe
that freedom trumps equality whereas Denis disagrees. Denis may
believe that freedom of expression and association vindicate
unlimited contributions to candidates seeking election, Christine
may disagree. All four of them may confess that they ﬁnd no systematic fashion of justifying the pattern of judgements they avow
when freedom and equality as articulated in the contexts of a
range of policy disputes come into conﬂict. They follow their intuitions and can tell a good story, conﬁdent that they draw upon
respectable traditions of thinking and can ﬁnd plenty of fellow
travellers.
In these sorts of circumstances of dispute, settlement, as ever,
demands a basis of agreement, and it is hard to think of parties
who advance the cases sketched above not agreeing to the application of the values of freedom and equality which they avow as
being relevant to the issue of appropriate decision procedures. I
accept that this is possible but believe that it is implausible. Some
(the charge has been made against Hayek) may think of freedom as
entirely a matter of freedom of exchange plus a list of privileged
civil liberties, but they are hard put to deny that the citizen who
insists on opportunies for effective political participation claims a
liberty which their exclusion from the political process forecloses.
(This was one modest conclusion from our discussion of the value
of liberty in Chapter 3.) To emphasize the conclusion of many of
the arguments that have gone before, freedom and equality,
together with some conception of the general good which invokes
utilitarian considerations, open up a space for disagreement about
policies within an agreement about its practical resolution
through the use of democratic processes.
Granted the extent of agreement about core values and recognizing the scope for disagreement which the elaboration of these
values permits, it is likely that subscribers will agree along lines of
traditional consensus and disagree at points of familiar fracture.

339

DEMOCRACY

The pluralism I have characterized will both focus the points of
disagreement and direct us towards its practical resolution in
procedures of democratic decision-making. We can both agree to
disagree and agree on a majority settlement.
Matters are different in respect of what we designated as value
difference. Here we must accept that there may be no possibility of
accommodation through argument. No amount of deliberation
will get the pro-life and pro-choice advocates to accept premisses
from which they can construct an agreement. Agree as they might
on political values – they each love liberty, prize equality and
value democracy for its capacity to fairly settle political debate –
they deny that the rights and wrongs of abortion are a matter of
political settlement. There are plenty of other moral questions
which reveal striking differences in values and which need some
measure of political resolution. In Britain of late much attention
has been directed to issues concerning homosexuality. Parliament
has had to decide on the age of consent, on whether or not homosexual relations may be permitted between members of the armed
forces, whether it is right to forbid the promotion of homosexuality by schoolteachers. These debates raise important questions of
liberty and equality but they have also brought into the open
ostensibly non-political questions concern the value of marriage
and family life as well as discussions of whether homosexual relations are natural or perversions of human nature, questions which,
incredibly, seem the stuff of religious dispute. As ever, spokesmen
(generally men) for the churches have intervened reminding a
kingdom of atheists of the principles of divine law, and in fairness,
their pronouncements have supported both sides in the debates.
It might look as though opposing parties to moral disputes of
this depth and irresolvability stand to each other in the manner of
those for whom ﬁghting or the exercise of unauthorized power is
the only way forward. But this would be a hasty conclusion. Public
reason, the applicability of principles of the general will, cannot
be expected to frame the terms of argument in which citizens
engage when substantive questions of these sorts are raised for
decision. It can be recognized as making a weighty (and for many a
decisive) contribution to debate, but its values cannot be expected
to trump deep moral beliefs which participants will inevitably
assert in pressing a dissenting case.40 But the principles of the

340

DEMOCRACY

general will do ﬁnd a place in vindicating a decision procedure to
establish a legally binding solution.
Procedural conceptions of democracy, which rest the case for
democracy on the fairness of the democratic way of reaching
decisions, in particular, on citizens’ rightful claims to equal
respect as autonomous agents, have been criticized by theorists of
deliberative democracy for failing to acknowledge the reach of
democratic principles into questions of substance which a democracy deliberates.41 Procedural considerations come into their
own where deliberative democracy overreaches itself, claiming
philosophical resources which turn out to be impotent in the resolution of conspicuous and divisive disagreement. One cannot disbar citizens from applying idiosyncratic or narrowly religious
principles in matters of political controversy. One cannot get all
parties to a democratic decision to respect the moral content of a
democratic decision. But one may be able to convince some of them
that the decision should be respected on procedural grounds – that
it is the only fair way to settle the issue.
For the rest, be on your guard. Ominously, your salvation is their
business.

341

Notes

Preface
1 G.W.F. Hegel, The Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1977, ¶590, p. 360.

1

Introduction

1 The term could be dreadfully misleading, since particularism is
often construed as the moral view that normative ethics concerns
the assertion of particular judgements in speciﬁc contexts rather
than the application of general principles, e.g. it is unjust to punish
the innocent. I could ﬁnd no better term. ‘Empiricist’ and ‘inductivist’ seem far too general. I welcome suggestions for an alternative and caution readers that the term is not in widespread use and
should be employed with discretion.
2 G.W.F. Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right (henceforth
Philosophy of Right), ed. A.W. Wood, trans. H.B. Nisbet, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1991, §132 and Remark.
3 I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. P. Guyer and A.W.

343

NOTES

4
5
6

7

8

9

Wood, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998, note at pp.
100–1.
The phrase is Hobbes’s. See T. Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. C.B.
Macpherson, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1985, Ch.13, p. 188.
Remember, I haven’t argued for this. I’ve just asserted it and will
proceed to review the implications of this claim as if it were true.
J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1972, pp.
48–50. Rawls distinguishes narrow and wide reﬂective equilibrium.
A reader reminds me that the process of reﬂection I describe is
more akin to the ﬁrst than the second. I am assuming the pursuit of
a wide reﬂective equilibrium since I am supposing that the philosopher will review candidate moral theories in the light of other
available theories as well as in the light of the judgements and
principles speciﬁc theories reject or endorse.
These are not straw targets. No traditionalist practice is so awful
that it can’t ﬁnd a trendy apologist. See Martha Nussbaum’s report
of a conference on ‘Value and Technology’, in M. Nussbaum, Sex
and Social Justice, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 35–7.
For a strong defence of utilitarianism as an ethical theory
signally apt for political employment, see R.E. Goodin, Utilitarianism as a Public Philosophy, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1995.
Examples include M. Sagoff, The Economy of the Earth, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1988 and J. O’Neill, Ecology, Policy
and Politics, London, Routledge, 1993.

2

Utilitarianism

1 John Rawls, Robert Nozick, Ronald Dworkin, to name three. John
Rawls contrasts his own theory of justice with utilitarianism
partly ‘because the several variants of the utilitarian view have
long dominated our philosophical tradition and continue to do so’,
J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1972, p. 52.
2 Bentham, upon ﬁnding that his proposals for reform were ignored,
became incensed by the disregard of government for the welfare of
its subjects and railed against its evident pursuit of sinister (i.e.
sectional or minority) interests. Recently, Robert Goodin has
stressed the aptness of utilitarianism as a public philosophy. See R.
Goodin, Utilitarianism as a Public Philosophy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
3 See Anscombe’s reference to Gareth Evans in G.E.M. Anscombe,

344

NOTES

4
5
6
7

8

9
10

11

12

13

14

‘On the Frustration of the Majority by the Fulﬁlment of the
Majority’s Will’, Analysis, 1976, vol. 36, pp. 161–8.
For Bentham’s misgivings, see B. Parekh (ed.), Bentham’s Political
Thought, London, Croom Helm, 1973, pp. 309–10.
J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, in Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative
Government, London, Dent, 1968, Ch. 5, p. 58.
I take the distinction that follows from D. Lyons, Forms and Limits
of Utilitarianism, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1965.
There is an important wrinkle here. Do we judge actions (or agents)
in the light of what consequences transpire or in the light of what
consequences agents believe will transpire (expected utility) or in
the light of what a rational agent, possessed of whatever information we expect such agents to gather, would predict should transpire? See J.J.C. Smart, ‘An Outline of a System of Utilitarian Ethics’, in J.J.C. Smart and B. Williams, Utilitarianism: For and
Against, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1973, for a
survey of the issues.
Since agreement should never be taken for granted, it’s worth
pointing out that Friedrich Nietzsche would not endorse compassion and sympathy as dispositions which should be valued. But he
wasn’t a utilitarian, either.
The Nautical Almanac is a famous example used by J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Ch. II, pp. 22–3.
See Bentham’s outline of the ‘feliciﬁc calculus’, in J. Bentham, An
Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ed. J.H.
Burns and H.L.A. Hart, London, Methuen, 1982, pp. 38–41.
In the discussion of rules that follows, I rely heavily on John Rawls,
‘Two Concepts of Rules’, Philosophical Review, 1955, vol. 64, pp. 3–
32, repr. in Collected Papers, ed. S. Freeman, Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press, 1999, pp. 20–46 and P. Foot (ed.), Theories
of Ethics, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1967.
Ideal rule utilitarianism has been supported most conspicuously by
R.B. Brandt. See his Ethical Theory, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall, 1959, and A Theory of the Good and the Right, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1979.
The best known criticisms are those of J.J.C. Smart and David
Lyons. In what follows I adapt the examples dicussed by Lyons in
Forms and Limits.
The term ‘rule-worship’ was introduced in this context by J.J.C.
Smart in ‘Extreme and Restricted Utilitarianism’, Philosophical
Quarterly, 1956, vol. 6, pp. 344–54, repr. in P. Foot (ed.), Theories of
Ethics.

345

NOTES

15 The distinction between internal and external perspectives on
institutional rules is made in H.L.A. Hart, The Concept of Law,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1961, pp. 55–6.
16 But notice: I have not mentioned the ‘institution’ of promising.
There is something conventional (as Hume saw) about institutions
which is grist to the utilitarian’s mill, i.e. we can always ask which
institution is best or which form of this institution is best – and use
utility to weigh different answers. Since I don’t think that promising is up for assessment in these ways, I don’t think of it as an
institution (cf. J. Rawls, ‘Two Concepts of Rules’).
17 As Hegel, contra Kant, clearly recognized. See G.W.F. Hegel,
Philosophy of Right, §75 and I. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals,
trans. M. Gregor, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1991,
§§23–7, for an apt and interesting contretemps on the ethical nature
of family life.
18 To keep matters simple, I am assuming in my discussion of these
examples that goods are distributed equally amongst the
population.
19 For a discussion of all of the issues I survey as problems of maximization, see James Grifﬁn, Well-being, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1986, especially Chs v – vii.
20 The proof – as much proof as is possible in the nature of the subject, which is not to say the kind of proof established by strict
deduction from true premisses – is given in Utilitarianism, Ch.2.
It has prompted an enormous amount of interpretation, criticism
and defence. For a hostile account, see G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1903, Ch. 1; for sympathetic defence of elements of the proof, see John Skorupski, John
Stuart Mill, London, Routledge, 1989, pp. 283–8.
21 J. Grifﬁn, Well-being, p. 8.
22 This point is also illustrated by Nozick’s famous example of the
experience-machine. See R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia,
New York, Basic Books, 1974, pp. 42–5.
23 See M. Sagoff, The Economy of the Earth, for a strong critique of
these techniques in the ﬁeld of environmental policy.
24 Grifﬁn believes such an account can be given. He claims clearsighted, straight-thinking sadists would wish to give up their
practices, which are costly and risky. See Well-being, pp. 25–6.
Maybe . . . I opine, from a stance of total ignorance. But the newspapers tell me that practitioners devise consensual arrangements
and the punitive institutions of society, from schools to prisons,
offer the sadist a variety of career structures in the public service.

346

NOTES

25 Other elements should not be discounted in a full treatment, notably the sceptical challenge to assumptions of infallibility.
26 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, in Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative
Government, Ch. III, p. 114.
27 Many readers have identiﬁed non-utilitarian themes in Mill’s
argument in this chapter, in particular the perfectionist account of
human ﬂourishing. In what follows, I shall ignore these.
28 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. I, p. 73.
29 J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Ch.V, pp. 49–50.
30 The utilitarian position is defended capably by R. Brandt, A Theory
of the Good and the Right, Ch. XVI.
31 Hume’s account is given in the A Treatise of Human Nature,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1965, III, ii, 1–4, the Enquiries,
Concerning Human Understanding and the Principles of Morals,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1902, pp. 183–4 and is explicit in
many of his essays. It has been widely discussed. David Miller,
Philosophy and Ideology in Hume’s Political Thought, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1981, pp. 60–77 and J.L. Mackie, Hume’s Moral
Thought, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980, pp. 76–96, provide accessible discussions. The subject is treated exhaustively in
J. Harrison, Hume’s Theory of Justice, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1981.
32 This interpretation of Hume has been challenged. For contrary
views, see D. Gauthier, ‘David Hume, Contractarian’, The Philosophical Review, 1979, vol. LXXXVIII, pp. 3–38 and R. Hardin, Morality within the Limits of Reason, Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, 1988. These readings are rejected in D. Knowles, ‘Conservative Utilitarianism’, Utilitas, 2000, vol. 12, pp. 155–75.
33 The law of diminishing marginal utility of income is rejected
ﬁrmly as unscientiﬁc by R. Lipsey, Introduction to Positive Economics, London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1965, pp. 149–51. Lipsey’s
arguments support those of Lionel Robbins in The Nature and
Signiﬁcance of Economic Science, London, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1932.
34 A very full discussion of the difﬁculties in this area and the implications of them for politics can be found in Raymond Plant, Modern Political Thought, Oxford, Blackwell, 1991, pp. 184–218.
35 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch.13, p. 186.
36 This interpretation of Hobbes is contested. See Bernard Gert,
‘Hobbes and Psychological Egoism’, Journal of the History of Ideas,
1967, vol. XXVIII, repr. in B.H. Baumrin (ed.), Hobbes’s Leviathan, Belmont, Calif., Wadsworth, 1969, and T. Hobbes, Man and

347

NOTES

37
38
39
40

41

42

43

Citizen, ed. B. Gert, Brighton, Harvester Press, 1978, ‘Introduction’,
pp. 5–10. I believe the issue is settled by a couple of sentences in
Leviathan where Hobbes insists that persons act only to procure
some good for themselves. T. Hobbes, Leviathan, pp. 192, 209.
D. Hume, ‘Of Passive Obedience’, in Essays, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1963, pp. 474–5.
D. Hume, ‘Of the Origin of Government’, in Essays, p. 35.
D. Hume, ‘Of the Original Contract’, in Essays, p. 67.
D. Hume, ‘Of the First Principles of Government’, in Essays, p. 29.
See n. 32 above for sources which challenge this utilitarian reading
of Hume.
This thumbnail sketch of anarchism derives from many authors.
The most celebrated utilitarian anarchist is William Godwin,
Enquiry concerning Political Justice, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1971. Good general accounts of the anarchist literature can
be found in George Woodcock, Anarchism, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1963 and April Carter, The Political Theory of Anarchism,
London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971. The most sophisticated
modern defence of anarchism is Michael Taylor, Community,
Anarchy and Liberty, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1982.
My presentation of this argument is much more simple than anything to be found in Bentham’s writings. The crucial premiss, that
individuals are the best judges of their own interests, is obviously
false in respect of many individuals. Bentham excludes females,
non-adult males, those who fail a reading test and alien travellers from the constituency of democratic participants. See B.
Parekh (ed.), Bentham’s Political Thought, p. 208. He was also
well aware that, where ignorance and superstition are rife, voters
may make disastrous mistakes. But he also believed that education
and full information will tend over the long run to produce social
conditions which validate the assumption of wide competence. For
a careful discussion of Bentham’s views, see Ross Harrison,
Bentham, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983, pp. 195–224.
Bentham himself thought direct democracy evidently impractical
and advocated a form of representative democracy designed to
secure an identity of the interests of the representatives and the
interests of the people. See excerpts from Bentham’s Constitutional
Code in B. Parekh (ed.), Bentham’s Political Thought, pp. 206–15.
James Mill, Bentham’s follower and John Stuart Mill’s father,
made a most effective defence of representative democracy in his
Essay on Government, Indianapolis, Liberal Arts Press, 1955, a

348

NOTES

51

tract which nicely summarizes the central elements of Bentham’s
thought. He argues that, since all potential legislators are rogues,
representative institutions with powers of regular recall are the
best safeguard against their pursuit of self-interest.
See G.E.M. Anscombe, ‘On the Frustration of the Will of the
Majority’.
These objections are most familiar from the work of John Rawls,
Robert Nozick, Ronald Dworkin, Bernard Williams and Samuel
Schefﬂer. See the collection of papers, Consequentialism and its
Critics, ed. S. Schefﬂer, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1988, for a
review of the most inﬂuential recent literature.
Peter Railton, ‘Alienation, Consequentialism, and the Demands of
Morality’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1984, vol. 13, pp. 134–71,
repr. in Schefﬂer (ed.), Consequentialism and Shelly Kagan, The
Limits of Morality, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989, have proved
stout defenders.
J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Ch. 1, p. 3.
Ibid., Ch. II, p. 22.
J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, in The Social
Contract and Discourses, London, Dent, 1973.
Incredibly, economists have attempted to do so. For a description
(and severe criticism) of the ‘Wyoming experiment’, see M. Sagoff,
The Economy of the Earth, pp. 74–98. See also John O’Neill, Ecology, Policy and Politics, pp. 102–22.
James Grifﬁn believes this. See his Well-being, pp. 75–124.

3

Liberty

44
45

46

47
48
49
50

1 I shall use the terms ‘liberty’ and ‘freedom’ interchangeably.
2 I. Berlin, ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’, in Four Essays on Liberty,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1969, p. 121. Berlin goes on to
claim that historians of ideas have recorded ‘more than two hundred senses of this protean word’. I believe him, although he offers
no evidence for this.
3 J. Locke, Two Treatises of Government, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1960, Second Treatise, §§ 6, 22, 57.
4 I. Berlin, ‘Two Concepts’, pp. 121–2.
5 Ibid., p. 131.
6 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 21, p. 262.
7 ‘The existence of an invariably enforced legal rule prohibiting
the doing of B does not imply that persons subject to it are unfree

349

NOTES

8
9
10

11

12
13

14
15
16

to do B’, H. Steiner, An Essay on Rights, Oxford, Blackwell, 1994,
p. 32. See also H. Steiner, ‘Individual Liberty’, Aristotelian Society
Proceedings, 1975, vol. LXXV, pp. 35–50.
I. Berlin, ‘Two Concepts’, p. 122, n. 2.
I. Berlin, ‘Two Concepts’, pp. 124–7 and ‘Introduction’, pp. liii–lv.
Ibid., p. lvi. At p. l, Berlin describes his opponents as ‘philosophical
monists who demand ﬁnal solutions’. This careful choice of words
embraces both theoretical absurdity and practical barbarity.
Ibid., p. xlviii. Earlier he tells us that the ‘absence of such [negative] freedom is due to the closing of such doors or failure to open
them, as a result, intended or unintended, of alterable human
practices, of the operation of human agencies’, p. xl.
Here I parody the ideological history of the British Labour Party,
1983–94.
See Ralph Wedgwood, ‘Why Promote People’s Freedom?’,
unpublished. Wedgwood links his account of freedom to those provided in G.A. Cohen, ‘Capitalism, Freedom and the Proletariat’, in
Alan Ryan (ed.), The Idea of Freedom, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1979, and C.B. MacPherson, Democratic Theory: Essays in
Retrieval, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1973, Ch.V. He distinguishes
freedom as social empowerment from Sen’s notion of freedom as
opportunities or abilities in general. Thus one’s health may impair
one’s opportunities, but if poor health is not caused by social conditions nor is it remedial by social improvement, it is not a social
condition which limits one’s liberty. By contrast, ‘access to health
care . . . is a social condition, and – since a standard likely consequence of access to health care is the power that comes with
reasonably good health and long life – it is an important constituent of social empowerment. So if two people have equal access to
equally good health care, then that will make an equal contribution to their social freedom, regardless of their actual levels of
health. On the other hand, even if they are equally advantaged in
terms of social freedom, if one is debilitated by ill health and the
other is not, then the ﬁrst person is worse off with respect to power
or capabilities than the second’, p. 5. For Sen’s account, see A.K.
Sen, Inequality Re-examined, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1992, Ch. 3
and ‘Capability and Well-being’, in M.C. Nussbaum and A.K. Sen
(eds), The Quality of Life, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1992, pp. 30–53.
R. Wedgwood, ‘Why Promote People’s Freedom?’, p. 5.
I. Berlin, Four Essays, p. 131.
J. Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding (many editions),
II, XXI, §48; J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse on the Origin of Inequality,

350

NOTES

17

18
19
20
21
22
23

24
25

26
27

28
29

1st Part, p. 54; The Social Contract, Bk. I, Ch. VIII, p. 178; I. Kant,
Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. as The Moral Law
by H.B. Paton, London, 1969, pp. 93–5; G.W.F. Hegel, Elements of the
Philosophy of Right, ed. A.W. Wood, trans. H.B. Nisbet, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1991, ‘Introduction’. H. Frankfurt,
‘Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person’, Journal of
Philosophy, 1971, vol. LXVII(1), pp. 5–20, repr. in G. Watson (ed.),
Free Will, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1982; C. Taylor, ‘What is
human agency?’, in Philosophical Papers, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1985, vol. I, pp. 15–44.
J.-J. Rousseau, The Social Contract, Bk I, Ch. VIII, p.178: ‘We might,
over and above all this, add, to what man acquires in the civil state,
moral liberty, which alone makes him truly master of himself; for
the mere impulse of appetite is slavery, while obedience to a law
which we prescribe to ourselves is liberty.’
G.C. MacCallum, Jr, ‘Negative and Positive Freedom’, Philosophical Review, 1967, vol. 76, pp. 312–34.
J. Feinberg, Social Philosophy, Englewood Cliffs, N.J, Prentice
Hall, 1973, pp. 12–13.
J. Gray, Isaiah Berlin, London, Harper Collins, 1995, pp. 18–19.
Ibid., p. 19.
For Rousseau’s deﬁnition of moral liberty, see note 17 above.
Quentin Skinner, most conspicuously in ‘The Idea of Negative Liberty’, in R. Rorty, J.B. Schneewind and Q. Skinner (eds), Philosophy in History, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1984;
Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Government and Freedom, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997, which cites the earlier work
on which this monograph builds; Jean-Fabien Spitz, La Liberté
Politique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1995.
P. Pettit, Republicanism, p. 52.
The phrase is Harrington’s, cited by P. Pettit, Republicanism, p. 39.
James Harrington, The Commonwealth of Oceana and A System of
Politics, ed. J.G.A. Pocock, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1992, p. 8.
J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, 2nd Part, p.
86.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1977, ‘Independence and Dependence of
Self-consciousness: Lordship and Bondage’, §§178–96.
J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. 1. For ‘tracking’, see P. Pettit, Republicanism, pp. 52–8.
J.S. Mill, On Liberty, p. 73.

351

NOTES

30 J. Raz, The Morality of Freedom, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1986.
See especially Chs 1, 14–15.
31 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, ‘Introduction’. S.I. Benn, A
Theory of Freedom, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988.
32 This distinction of ﬁrst- and second-order desires is the nub of H.
Frankfurt’s thesis in ‘Freedom of the Will’. What follows is best
understood as a development of Frankfurt’s thesis constructed
from a range of critical material.
33 An objection raised by G. Watson, ‘Free agency’, Journal of
Philosophy, 1975, vol. 72, pp. 205–20, repr. in G. Watson, Free Will.
Frithjof Bergmann offers a lovely philosophical redescription of
Dostoyevsky’s malevolent clerk in Notes from the Underground as a
sort of contrary wanton, a wanton of the third-order, perhaps. See
F. Bergmann, On Being Free, Notre Dame, University of Notre
Dame Press, 1977, pp. 17–22.
34 For the notion of free action as produced in accordance with ideas
of the good and the true, see S. Wolf, Freedom within Reason,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1990. For the notion of ‘strong
evaluation’, see C. Taylor, ‘Responsibility for Self’, in A.O. Rorty
(ed.), The Identities of Persons, Berkeley, University of California
Press, 1976, pp. 281–99, repr. in G. Watson, Free Will. Also, C. Taylor,
Sources of the Self, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989,
Ch. 3.
35 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. V, p. 152.
36 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, p. 116.
37 F.D. Schier, ‘The Kantian Gulag’, in D. Knowles and J. Skorupski
(eds), Virtue and Taste, Oxford, Blackwell, 1993, pp. 1–18, cited at
pp. 1–2.
38 The account of autonomy I shall develop draws on a range of
sources. Prominent amongst them have been J. Raz, The Morality
of Freedom and S.I. Benn, A Theory of Freedom.
39 See, for an inﬂuential discussion, P.F. Strawson, ‘Social Morality
and Individual Ideal’, Philosophy, 1961, vol. XXXVI, repr. in
Strawson, Freedom and Resentment, London, Methuen, 1974,
pp. 26–44.
40 A typical example is John Rawls’ defence of ‘the Aristotelian Principle’: ‘other things equal, human beings enjoy the exercise of their
realized capacities (their innate or trained abilities), and their
enjoyment increases the more the capacity is realized, or the
greater its complexity’, A Theory of Justice, pp. 424–33, cited at
p. 426.
41 This is Schiller’s quip, loosely rendered by Hegel. See Hegel,

352

NOTES

42
43

44

45

46

47
48
49

50

51

52

53
54

Philosophy of Right, §124, and the accompanying note by Allen
Wood.
B. Williams, ‘Toleration: An Impossible Virtue?’, in D. Heyd (ed.),
Toleration, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1996, p. 18.
The classical discussion of this problem, alternatively characterized as incontinence, or, in the Greek, akrasia, is Aristotle,
Nichomachean Ethics (many editions) , Bk VII.
W. Kymlicka, Multicultural Citizenship, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1995, is an excellent survey of the range of the modern problem of
toleration.
The pros and cons of this debate are rehearsed more fully in G.
Graham, ‘Freedom and Democracy’, Journal of Applied Philosophy,
1992, vol. 9, pp. 149–60 and D. Knowles, ‘Freedom and Democracy
Revisited’, Journal of Applied Philosophy, 1995, vol. 12, pp. 283–92.
Brian Barry reports that ‘Those ordinary people who say in
response to the surveys asked by political scientists that they personally could do things to change a national or even a local political decision which they disapprove of are not so much ﬁne
unalienated examples of the democratic citizen as – if they mean it
– sufferers from delusions of grandeur on a massive scale’, ‘Is it
Better to be Powerful or Lucky?’, in B. Barry, Democracy, Power
and Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989, p. 301.
J.S. Mill, On Liberty, pp. 72–3.
J.J. Thomson, The Realm of Rights, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press, 1990, pp. 259–71.
Defended in full detail in J. Feinberg, Harm to Others, vol. 1 of The
Moral Limits of the Criminal Law, New York, Oxford University
Press, 1984.
J. Feinberg, Harm to Others, p. 37, quoting Nicholas Rescher, Welfare: The Social Issue in Philosophical Perspective, Pittsburgh,
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1972, p. 6.
Lord Justice James Fitzjames Stephen, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, London, Smith, Elder, 1873, new edn, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1967 (a direct riposte to Mill’s On Liberty), is the
classical source of this objection.
For a discussion of these questions, see D. Knowles, ‘A Reformulation of the harm principle’, Political Theory, 1978, vol. 6,
pp. 233–46.
G. Graham, Contemporary Social Philosophy, Oxford, Blackwell,
1988, pp. 123–4.
As full a list as anyone could usefully employ is found in J. Feinberg, Harm to Others, at pp. 16–17.

353

NOTES

55 P. Devlin, The Enforcement of Morals, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1965.
56 H.L.A. Hart, Law, Liberty and Morality, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1963.
57 Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution (CMD 247) 1957 (The Wolfenden Report).
58 Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186.
59 The strongest claims to this effect have been made by M. Sandel,
Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
60 The term is Ronald Dworkin’s, used in ‘Liberal Community’, California Law Review, 1989, vol. 77, pp. 479–504, to characterize one
argument of his communitarian opponents.
61 Ibid., p. 497. (I confess: this reader’s imagination runs riot in contemplation of Dworkin’s simile. Is he teasing his opponent? His pofaced prose makes it hard to tell.)
62 L.B. Schwartz, ‘Morals Offences and the Model Penal Code’,
Columbia Law Review, 1963, vol. LXIII, pp. 680, cited in J. Feinberg,
Social Philosophy, p. 43.
63 J. Waldron, ‘Rushdie and Religion’, in Liberal Rights, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 142, ﬁrst published in the
Times Literary Supplement, March 10–16, 1989, pp. 248, 260, as ‘Too
Important for Tact’.
64 Ibid., pp. 140–1.
65 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. 1, p. 73.
66 Ibid.
67 Ibid., Ch. V, p. 152.
68 Ibid.
69 One can’t conduct this sort of discussion without giving offence.
Readers who are fond of these pastimes, please accept my apologies, and note, appropriately for a discussion of paternalism, that
the list contains at least one self-inﬂicted wound.
70 W. Burroughs, Junkie, Paris, The Olympia Press, 1966.
71 I accept that this is a caricature of the poorly understood phenomena of addiction.
72 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. 1, pp. 65–72, for his account of the ‘tyranny
of the majority’.
73 Ibid., Ch. 5, pp. 164–70.

354

NOTES

4

Rights

1 In recent years a modern version of natural law theory has been
worked out by John Finnis, Natural Law and Natural Right,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1980.
2 J. Bentham, ‘A Critical Examination of the Declaration of Rights’,
in B. Parekh (ed.), Bentham’s Political Thought, pp. 258–69. Also
‘Anarchical Fallacies’, in J. Waldron (ed.), Nonsense upon Stilts.
Bentham, Burke and Marx on the Rights of Man, London, Methuen, 1987.
3 H.L.A. Hart, Law, Liberty and Morality, pp. 17–25.
4 W.E. Hohfeld, Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in
Judicial Reasoning, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1923.
Hohfeld’s classiﬁcation is discussed usefully in J. Feinberg, Social
Philosophy, Ch. 4, and J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1984, ‘Introduction’. Scholars of
jurisprudence have reﬁned Hohfeld’s analysis in an ever more
sophisticated fashion.
5 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 14, p. 189.
6 ‘Rights of action’ is D.D. Raphael’s terminology. They are contrasted, in his analysis, with ‘rights of recipience’. See D.D.
Raphael, Problems of Political Philosophy, London, Macmillan,
1970, pp. 68–9.
7 Joseph Raz deﬁnes rights in terms of their constituting a sufﬁcient
reason for holding some other person(s) to be under a duty. See
The Morality of Freedom, p. 166 and Ch. 7 generally.
8 Raz claims, plausibly, that there is no closed list of duties corresponding to each particular right. ‘This dynamic aspect of rights,
their ability to create new duties, is fundamental to any understanding of their nature and function in practical thought’, The
Morality of Freedom, p. 171.
9 J. Waldron, The Right to Private Property, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1988, Ch. 4. Waldron is sharpening a similar distinction
drawn initially by H.L.A. Hart, in ‘Are there any Natural Rights?’,
Philosophical Review, 1955, vol. LXIV(2), pp. 175–91, repr. in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights.
10 H.L.A. Hart, ‘Natural Rights’, in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of
Rights, pp. 77–8.
11 This line of criticism is taken by Maurice Cranston, What are
Human Rights?, London, Bodley Head, 1973. The discussion that
follows echoes arguments from Henry Shue, Basic Rights,
Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1980. A digest of

355

NOTES

12

13
14
15

16
17
18
19

20

21

22

23

Shue’s central arguments is available in R.E. Goodin and P. Pettit
(eds.), Contemporary Political Philosophy, Oxford, Blackwell, 1997,
pp. 341–55.
Jeremy Waldron argues along these lines in ‘Participation: The
Right of Rights’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1998, vol.
XCVIII, pp. 307–37.
J. Waldron, Theories of Rights, ‘Introduction’, p. 7.
J. Waldron, The Right to Private Property, Ch. 2.
An account of the different elements of the right to private property is given in A.M. Honoré, ‘Ownership’, in A.G. Guest (ed.),
Oxford Essays in Jurisprudence, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1961.
G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §§40, 46, 63, R. Tuck, Natural
Rights Theories, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1979.
G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §36.
R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 57.
The Marxist case against human rights is presented in J. Waldron
(ed.), Nonsense upon Stilts. The socialist critique of rights is discussed (and a socialist defence of rights mounted) in Tom Campbell, The Left and Rights, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1983.
Canonical texts of modern communitarianism include Charles
Taylor, ‘Atomism’, in Philosophical Papers, vol. II, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1985; Alasdair MacIntyre, After
Virtue, London, Duckworth, 1981; Michael Sandel, Liberalism and
the Limits of Justice, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
It is fair to say that the variety of forms taken by modern communitarian writings developed as criticisms of modern liberalism. The
main contours of these debates are usefully reviewed in S. Mulhall
and A. Swift, Liberals and Communitarians, Oxford, Blackwell,
1992.
The phrase comes from Michael Sandel, ‘The Procedural Republic
and the Unencumbered Self’, Political Theory, 1984, vol. 12, pp. 81–
96, repr. in R.E. Goodin and P. Pettit (eds), Contemporary Political
Philosophy, pp. 247–55.
The distinction of exclusive and inclusive rights has been put to
interesting use in the interpretation of Locke’s views on property
by James Tully, A Discourse on Property, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1980.
The cases that follow are discussed in W. Kymlicka, Multicultural
Citizenship, pp. 158–70. A useful survey of the philosophical
problems concerning group rights may be found in A. Buchanan,

356

NOTES

24

25
26
27
28

29
30

31

32
33
34

35
36
37
38

39

‘Liberalism and Group Rights’, in J.L. Coleman and A. Buchanan
(eds), In Harm’s Way: Essays in Honor of Joel Feinberg, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 1–15.
J. Locke, Second Treatise, Ch. 2, §6. For the theology underpinning
this argument, see J. Dunn, The Political Thought of John Locke,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1969.
J. Locke, Second Treatise, §27.
R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, pp. 169–70.
G.A. Cohen, ‘Self-ownership, World-ownership, and Equality: Part
II’, Social Philosophy and Policy, 1986, vol. 3.
This debate was one of the sub-texts of the development of liberalism. Rousseau, to take one classical example, savages Grotius,
arguing that no rational agent would choose slavery (Social Contract, Bk 1, Ch. IV). Robert Nozick, to select a modern thinker,
believes the opposite (Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 331).
H.L.A. Hart, ‘Are there any Natural Rights?’, p. 175.
I argued in Ch. 3 that any account of autonomy which explains why
it is valuable must be a good deal more cluttered than this – and I
will return to the point in what follows.
This ‘Choice Theory’ of rights was advanced (and subsequently
retracted) by H.L.A. Hart in ‘Are there any Natural Rights?’ It is
discussed in Tom Campbell, The Left and Rights, pp. 87–9 and J.
Waldron, The Right to Private Property, pp. 95–8.
Richard Dagger, Civic Virtues: Rights, Citizenship and Republican
Liberalism, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997, p. 31.
Ibid.
J.L. Mackie (not a Kantian) tentatively advanced a thesis similar to
this in ‘Can there be a Rights-based Moral Theory?’, in P.A.
French, T.E. Uehling, Jr and H.K. Wettstein (eds), Studies in Ethical Theory, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 1978, vol. 3, repr. in J.
Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights, pp. 168–81. In the latter volume,
pp. 182–200, ‘Rights-based Moralities’, J. Raz rejects this claim.
Mill, Utilitarianism, Ch. 5, p. 50.
Ibid.
L.W. Sumner, The Moral Foundation of Rights, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1987, pp. 8–9.
Can one have an interest one doesn’t recognize or even disavow?
Such issues are canvassed, with further references, in J. Waldron,
The Right to Private Property, pp. 87–92 and J. Raz, The Morality
of Freedom, pp. 180–3.
Aristotle, Politics, trans. E. Barker, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1946,
I, 2, 1253a3, 1253a7, III, 6, 1278b19.

357

NOTES

40 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 13, p. 188.
41 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §§182–7, for a summary.
42 The agreement to establish this court was signed by 120 nations.
Seven nations opposed the institution. The blacklist included the
governments of Algeria, China, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan and the
United States. For details, and a discussion of American policy (‘an
embarrassing low point for a government that portrays itself as a
champion of human rights’), see K. Roth, ‘The Court the US
Doesn’t Want’, The New York Review of Books, November 1998,
vol. XLV(18), pp. 45–7, cited at p. 45.
43 Consequentialist defences of moral rights are advanced in L.W.
Sumner, The Moral Foundations of Rights, Ch. 6 and T.M. Scanlon, ‘Rights, Goals and Fairness’, Erkenntnis, 1977, vol. II, pp.
81–94, repr. in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights, pp. 137–52.
44 J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, p. 191.
45 R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 33. On ‘side-constraints’,
see pp. 29–35.
46 J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Ch. V, p. 58.
47 R. Dworkin, ‘Rights as Trumps’, in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of
Rights, pp. 153–67, adapted from R. Dworkin, ‘Is there a Right to
Pornography?’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1981, vol. 1, pp.
177–212, repr. in R. Dworkin, A Matter of Principle, Cambridge,
Mass. and London, Harvard University Press, 1985, pp. 335–72.
48 David Lyons, ‘Utility and Rights’, in J.R. Pennock and J.W. Chapman (eds), Ethics, Economics and the Law: Nomos XXIV, New York,
New York University Press, 1982, pp. 107–38, repr. in D. Lyons,
Rights, Welfare and Mill’s Moral Theory, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1994, pp. 147–75 and J. Waldron, Theories of Rights,
pp. 110–36.
49 Alan Gewirth defends this position in ‘Are there any Absolute
Rights?’, Philosophical Quarterly, 1981, vol. 31, pp. 1–16, repr. in J.
Waldron, Theories of Rights, pp. 91–109. Nozick hopes to avoid the
issue of whether rights may be violated ‘in order to avoid catastrophic moral horror’ (Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 30 n.). Lyons
accepts that moral rights may be outweighed by very substantial
utilities or disutilities (Rights, Welfare, pp. 156–8).
50 Arthur C. Danto, ‘Constructing an Epistemology of Human Rights:
A Pseudo-problem?’, in E.F. Paul, J. Paul and F.D. Miller, Jr. (eds),
Human Rights, Oxford, Blackwell, 1984, p. 30. Danto is criticizing
Gewirth’s attempt to found rights in the neccessities of human
agency. I believe this no-theory theory is central to Hegel’s discussion of rights in the ‘Abstract Right’ section of the Philosophy of

358

NOTES

Right – for countless historical reasons, folk nowadays just claim
them as consequent on the moral status of person that they have
insisted on conferring on themselves and others whose moral
status they recognize. But I expect this reading to be controversial.

5

Distributive justice

1 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §185.
2 For a utilitarian approach, see P. Singer, Practical Ethics, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1979. For a Kantian approach,
see O. O’Neill, Faces of Hunger: An Essay on Poverty, Justice and
Development, London, Allen and Unwin, 1986. For contractualist
approaches, see C.R. Beitz, Political Theory and International Relations, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1979, and T.
Pogge, Realising Rawls, Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press, 1989.
3 R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 151.
4 Ibid., p. 153.
5 Ibid., p. 153.
6 To use Waldron’s language, a legitimate property holding always
requires the validation of some special rights claim. If so, a theory
of distributive justice necessarily grounds such claims. If so, one of
Waldron’s major theses: that special rights arguments cannot be
appealed to in the defence of a speciﬁc allocation of private property since it is vulnerable to the claims of general rights, cannot be
defended, since it is a proper requirement of an acceptable general
rights argument that it detail which special rights claims are legitimate. Nozick assumes, wrongly, that the dialectic begins with the
vindication of special rights claims. Waldron concludes, wrongly,
that special rights-based arguments have no distinctive place in the
justiﬁcation of a system of property holdings. See J. Waldron, The
Right to Private Property, Chs 4, 7.
7 R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, p. 161.
8 Ibid., p. 163.
9 Ibid., p. 169.
10 This point is stressed by J. Waldron, The Right to Private Property,
pp. 266ff., and endorsed by Leif Wenar in ‘Original Acquisition of
Private Property’, Mind, 1998, vol. 107, pp. 799–819.
11 J. Locke, Second Treatise, §25.
12 R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, pp. 174–5.
13 In what follows, I reproduce the argument of D. Knowles, ‘Autonomy and Side-constraints’, Mind, 1979, vol. LXXXVIII, pp. 263–5.

359

NOTES

14 I. Kant, Groundwork, pp. 90–3, Academy edn., Kritik der Reinen
Vernunft (I. Auﬂage), ed. B. Erdmann, Kant’s gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben von der Königlich Preußischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Band IV (edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of
Sciences, vol. IV), pp. 428–31.
15 For a discussion of Kant’s view of non-human nature see papers by
Allen W. Wood and Onora O’Neill, ‘Kant on Duties Regarding
Nonrational Nature’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1998,
Supp. vol. LXXII, pp. 189–228.
16 G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of Right, §§34–69. For discussion, see
D. Knowles, ‘Hegel on Property and Personality’, Philosophical
Quarterly, 1983, vol. 33, Allen W. Wood, Hegel’s Ethical Thought,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1990, Ch. 5 and J.
Waldron, The Right to Private Property, Ch. 10.
17 In a work like this which concentrates on the topics and puzzles
that comprise the agenda of political philosophy, it is hard to
detach Hayek’s views on the problems in hand in a way that does
not distort them through abstracting from their linkages to his
positions elsewhere. The discussion that follows will amount to
crude surgery, so I remedy the injustice to Hayek by recommending
that readers follow up his other writings. Brief but well-judged
accounts of Hayek’s contribution to political philosophy can be
found in R. Plant, Modern Political Thought, pp. 80–97 and M.H.
Lessnoff, Political Philosophers of the Twentieth Century, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1999, pp. 146–75. The most important primary sources
are The Road to Serfdom, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974,
The Constitution of Liberty, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1960 and Law, Legislation and Liberty, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1982 (published in three vols, 1973, 1976 and 1979).
18 F.A. Hayek, Law, Legislation and Liberty, pp. xv–xvi. and vol. 2,
throughout.
19 Ibid.. vol. 2, pp. 35–42.
20 F.A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, Ch. 19.
21 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 18, p. 234. Michael Lessnoff has argued,
intriguingly, that all property is social property in a genuine
democracy, because it is subject to the powers of the (democratic)
sovereign. M.H. Lessnoff, ‘Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy’,
Political Studies, 1979, vol. XXVII, pp. 594–602.
22 K. Marx, 1844 Manuscripts, in Early Writings, trans. R. Livingstone and G. Benton, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1975, pp. 328–9.
23 Centrally but not always. Intellectual property, e.g. patents and
copyright, is an exception.

360

NOTES

24 D. Hume, Treatise, Bk III, Part II; Second Enquiry, Section III.
Hume believed that a system of rules governing property amounted
to a system of justice so long as both the system and its constituent
rules promoted utility.
25 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §§190–5. Hegel’s terminology is
not careless. He regards the transformation of natural needs into
‘social’ needs as a distinctive (and liberating) feature of the modern
world.
26 The argument is taken from A.R. White, Modal Thinking, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1971, pp. 110–14. It is widely used. See also D. Wiggins,
‘The Claims of Need’, in Needs, Values, Truth, Oxford, Blackwell,
1987, p. 6. My adjudication of this argument agrees with the chief
lines of R. Plant’s discussion in Modern Political Thought, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1991, Ch. 5.
27 This objection is put by Brian Barry in Political Argument, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965, pp. 47–9. The reply I offer
draws on D. Wiggins, ‘Claims of Need’, in Needs, Values, Truth, pp.
6–11.
28 Ibid., p. 10.
29 Ibid.
30 These categories summarize crudely Wiggins’s discussion, Ibid.,
pp. 11–16.
31 Grifﬁn, Well-being, pp. 41–7, 51–3.
32 For the principle, see D. Braybrooke, Meeting Needs, Princeton,
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1987, pp. 60–75. Further references are given at p. 314.
33 Or what the author describes as (a suggestive, though tentative and
incomplete) list of course-of-life needs. The list that follows is cited
from Braybrooke, Meeting Needs, p. 36. Another list – of central
human functioning capabilities – is provided by Martha Nussbaum, Sex and Social Justice, pp. 41–2.
34 Notable contributions to these debates include Peter Singer, ‘Famine, Afﬂuence and Morality’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1992,
vol. 1, pp. 229–43 and Practical Ethics, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1979, Onora O’Neill, Faces of Hunger, London, Allen
and Unwin, 1986.
35 A.K. Sen, Inequality Re-examined, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1992,
p. ix.
36 A.K. Sen, ‘Equality of What?’, in S.M. McMurrin (ed.), The Tanner
Lectures on Human Values, vol. 1, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1980, pp. 195–220, repr. in Robert E. Goodin and
Philip Pettit (eds), Contemporary Political Philosophy.

361

NOTES

37 J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, p. 62. I shall discuss Rawls’s theory in
more detail later.
38 Ibid., p. 76. The quotation is amended from the two-person case
Rawls describes.
39 A.K. Sen, Inequality, p. 20.
40 A.K. Sen, ‘Equality of What?’, p. 478.
41 Hymns, Ancient and Modern, No. 573, ‘All things bright and
beautiful’.
42 This phenomenon, whereby individuals shape their desires in
accordance with the options realistically available, has been
dubbed ‘adaptive preference formation’ by John Elster. It is
discussed in John Elster, Sour Grapes, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1983. Sen discusses the impact of these considerations on the metric of equality in Inequality, pp. 6–7, 54–5. Martha
Nussbaum refers to this material in discussing the condition of
women in ‘American Women: Preferences, Feminism, Democracy’,
Sex and Social Justice, pp. 130–53.
43 A.K. Sen, Inequality, p. 44.
44 For a sensitive and clear-sighted discussion of these difﬁculties,
see Thomas Nagel, Equality and Partiality, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991, esp. Chs 10–11.
45 J.-J. Rousseau, Social Contract, Bk 1, Ch. IX, footnote.
46 J. Rawls, Political Liberalism, New York, Columbia University
Press, 1993.
47 Rawls disavows such a wide ambition, but I believe his practice
belies his explicit modesty. See Theory of Justice, pp. 7–11.
48 R. Dworkin, ‘The Original Position’, in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading
Rawls, Oxford, Blackwell, 1975, pp. 16–53, cited at p. 18.
49 See Rawls, Theory of Justice, Ch. VI.
50 Ibid., pp. 130–4.
51 Ibid., p. 18.
52 Ibid., p. 19.
53 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. X.
54 Rawls steps carefully round these questions in Political Liberalism,
New York, Columbian University Press, 1993, pp. 182–6.
55 J. Rawls, Theory of Justice, p. 137.
56 Ibid.
57 Such claims have been developed at book length by William A. Galston, Liberal Purposes, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1991 and George Sher, Beyond Neutrality, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1997. Rawls’s statement of the priority of the
right over the good is found at Theory of Justice, pp. 31–2. He

362

NOTES

58

59
60

61
62

63

64

65
66
67

68

articulates, some would say amends, his view at length in Political
Liberalism. See especially Lecture V, pp. 173–211.
Thomas Nagel, ‘Rawls on Justice’, Philosophical Review, 1973, vol.
LXXXII, pp. 220–34, repr. in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading Rawls. See
the latter at pp. 6–10.
The general conception and the two principles are cited in their
ﬁnal versions from Theory of Justice, pp. 302–3.
This formal statement (Theory of Justice, p. 152), conceals some
dreadful social choices which have been the occasion of anguished
historical judgement. Isaac Deutscher, considering whether Russia
could have emerged from barbarism by using less barbarous means,
is a celebrated example. See in particular the ﬁnal two chapters of
I. Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography, rev. edn, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1966.
Rawls, Political Liberalism, p. 187.
Those wishing to take the matter further should note the signiﬁcant alterations in the principle as stated in Political Liberalism,
Lecture VIII (at p. 291), in response to the criticisms of H.L.A.
Hart, in particular. See H.L.A. Hart, ‘Rawls on Liberty and its
Priority’, University of Chicago Law Review, 1973, vol. 40, pp. 534–
55, repr. in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading Rawls, pp. 230–52.
Rawls deploys a battery of arguments against average utility, as a
principle one might select in the original position. See Theory of
Justice, §§ 28–9. The case for average utility is made by J.C. Harsanyi, ‘Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and the Theory of
Risk Taking’, Journal of Political Economy, 1953, vol. 61, and, discussing Rawls, ‘Morality and the Theory of Rational Behaviour’,
in A.K. Sen and B. Williams (eds), Utilitarianism and Beyond,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Is envy a feature of human nature that can’t be eradicated by honest and careful reﬂection? Perhaps it is, but so too, one might think,
is the docile and unquestioning acceptance of traditional inequalities, the poor-man-at-the-gate syndrome noted earlier.
Rawls, Theory of Justice, p. 440.
Ibid., p. 4.
T. Scanlon, ‘Contractualism and Utilitarianism’, in A.K. Sen and
B. Williams (eds), Utilitarianism and Beyond. So far as I can see,
speciﬁc questions concerning justice are not addressed in Scanlon’s recent book, What We Owe to Each Other, Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press, 1999.
This point is made by T. Nagel, Equality and Partiality, pp. 38–40.
Does Rawls accept Scanlon’s version of contractualism, which

363

NOTES

69

70

71

72
73
74
75

rejects the apparatus of the original position, the veil of ignorance,
and consequently, maximin reasoning governing choice under conditions of uncertainty? In Political Liberalism, despite commendatory remarks, he doesn’t say.
To my knowledge, Rawls does not express a clear view as to
whether private ownership of the means of production or some
variety of socialism (common ownership by the community or by
workers in ﬁrms are two different models) is best. The contours of
the property system will be dilineated by ‘the traditions, institutions, and social forces of each country, and its particular historical circumstances’, Theory of Justice, p. 274. He does argue for a
market system of ﬁxing prices (ibid., pp. 270–4) and favours a
property-owning democracy wherein property includes ‘productive
assets’. If ‘productive assets’ mean tools and raw materials, the
idea is quaint; if it means stocks and shares, the ideal is underdescribed. So far as the powers of private shareholders in public
companies are concerned, they may as well be given cash. See
J. Rawls, ‘Preface for the French Edition of A Theory of Justice’, in
J. Rawls, Collected Papers, ed. S. Freeman, Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press, 1999, p. 419.
So I claim. Rawls himself distinguishes the idea of the ‘welfare
state’ from that of the ‘property-owning democracy’, endorsing the
latter and rejecting the former: the welfare state may allow such
‘large and inheritable inequalities of wealth [as are] incompatible
with the fair value of equal liberties . . . as well as large disparities
of income that violate the difference principle’ (ibid.). Would that
these terms were so well deﬁned that such distinctions could be
conﬁdently drawn!
This objection is put by R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, pp.
213–27, David Miller, Social Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1976,
pp. 46–8 and Ronald Dworkin, ‘What is Equality? Part I: Equality
of Welfare; Part II: Equality of Resources’, Philosophy and Public
Affairs, 1981, vol. 10, pp. 185–246, 283–345.
For a full-length treatment, see George Sher, Desert, Princeton,
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1987.
J. Rawls, Theory of Justice, p. 101.
Ibid., pp. 303–10.
Important contributions to this literature include: A. MacIntyre,
After Virtue, London, Duckworth, 1981; C. Taylor, ‘Atomism’, in
Philosophy and the Human Sciences, vol. 2 of Philosophical Papers
and ‘Cross-purposes: The Liberal–Communitarian Debate’, in N.
Rosenblum (ed.), Liberalism and the Moral Life, Cambridge, Mass.,

364

NOTES

Harvard University Press, 1989; M. Sandel, Liberalism and the
Limits of Justice, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982; M.
Walzer, Spheres of Justice, Oxford, Blackwell, 1983. Valuable
reviews of these debates are found in W. Kymlicka, Liberalism,
Community and Culture, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989 and S.
Mulhall and A. Swift, Liberals and Communitarians, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1992. The classical source of communitarianism is
Aristotle’s Politics, of modern communitarianism, G.W.F. Hegel,
Philosophy of Right, §§ 142–57.

6

Political obligation

1 I introduce the qualiﬁcation here to avoid the implication of legal
positivism that any formally authoritative legal prescription gives
rise to a legal obligation. Thus, in the case of an unjust law one may
have a legal obligation, but no moral obligation, to comply. The
issue is too large to broach. Classic modern sources include H.L.A.
Hart, The Concept of Law, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1961, L. Fuller,
The Morality of Law, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1969 and
R. Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously, London, Duckworth, 1977.
2 Leslie Green distinguishes the questions of whether the state has
legitimate authority from the question of whether citizens have a
political obligation by claiming that political obligation is an obligation held by all citizens to obey all laws. It is ‘doubly universal’.
By contrast the state may have authority under limited conditions
which do not require it to have authority over all persons. See L.
Green, The Authority of the State, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1988,
pp. 228–40, cited at p. 228. Likewise, Joseph Raz argues for the
‘separateness of the issues of (1) the authority of the state; (2) the
scope of its justiﬁed power; (3) the obligation to support just
institutions; (4) the obligation to obey the law’, J. Raz, The Morality
of Freedom, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1986, p. 104. I judge these
matters to be controversial, but have tried not to beg any questions
by my use of this range of terminology. Where a substantial philosophical conclusion is at stake, I try to argue the point. Thus, for
example, I reject the claim that political obligation is ‘doubly
universal’.
3 We shall examine this assumption later.
4 Poor Shaw published the quaintly named Ladies Directory, giving
names, addresses, photographs and listing the special skills of
prostitutes. There’s an Internet fortune awaiting Shaw’s successor.

365

NOTES

5

6
7

8
9
10
11
12

13

14

15
16

17

His case is discussed in H.L.A. Hart, Law, Liberty and Morality, pp.
6–12, citing the judgements at (1961) 2 A.E.R. 446 and (1962) A.C.
223.
The importance of this purpose to civil disobedience is stressed
by Peter Singer, Democracy and Disobedience, London, Oxford
University Press, 1974, pp. 72–84.
T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Chs 17–18, quoted at pp. 227 and 230.
I ignore the complications introduced in Ch. 29 of Leviathan,
where Hobbes discusses the dissolution of the sovereign power and
the consequent dissolution of citizens’ duties. See also Ch. 21, pp.
272–4, where Hobbes discusses cases in which subjects are absolved
of their obedience to the sovereign.
J. Locke, Second Treatise, §6.
This matter is well discussed in J. Hampton, Hobbes and the Social
Contract Tradition, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986.
T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 13, p. 186.
Ibid., Ch. 18, p. 238.
I. Kant, The Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. P. Guyer and
A.W. Wood, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 100–
1, p. Axii.: Kritik der reinen Vernunft (1. Auﬂage), ed. B. Erdmann,
Kant’s gesammelte Schriften, herausgegeben von der Königlich
Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Band IV (edited by the
Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences, vol. IV), Berlin, Georg
Reimer, 1911.
For a useful compendium of anarchist writings, see G. Woodcock,
The Anarchist Reader, London, Fontana, 1977. For a history of
anarchism, see G. Woodcock, Anarchism, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1963. Two useful philosophical discussions of this tradition
are A. Carter, The Political Theory of Anarchism, London,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971 and D. Miller, Anarchism, London, J.M. Dent, 1984.
M. Weber, From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans. and ed.
H.H. Gerth and C.W. Mills, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1946, p. 78.
J.-J. Rousseau, A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, in The
Social Contract and Discourses, p. 45. See also pp. 65–6.
S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority, London, Tavistock, 1974. This
work is summarized in S. Milgram, article on ‘Obedience’, in Richard L. Gregory (ed.), The Oxford Companion to the Mind, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, 1987.
J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. 3. Mill may be the wrong authority to
invoke here. A critic (Pat Shaw) suggests that the Milgram effect

366

NOTES

18

19

20
21

22

23

may be worse in liberal regimes than authoritarian ones. In the
latter, folks may obey only when they have to! A dismal, but cautionary thought.
Michael Taylor’s books defend anarchism in a fashion that is both
philosophically sophisticated and sociologically alert. See
Anarchy and Cooperation, London, Wiley, 1976, 2nd edn published
as The Possibility of Cooperation, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1987 and Community, Anarchy and Liberty,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
I remember from my youth (the reference long vanished) an anarchist tract which compared two postwar refugee camps in East
Anglia, one anarchic, the other controlled by a local version of
Colonel Blimp. Guess which was the happier, healthier and more
productive!
R.P. Wolff, In Defense of Anarchism, 2nd edn, New York, Harper,
1976, p. 15.
Wolff’s striking thesis was immediately challenged by J. Reiman, In
Defense of Political Philosophy, New York, Harper and Row, 1972.
Wolff replied in the 2nd edn of In Defense of Anarchism. The issue
is carefully reviewed in L. Green, The Authority of the State, pp.
24–36.
The bones of the communitarian application of social metaphysics
to the relationship of citizens to the state is presented in M. Sandel, ‘The Procedural Republic and the Unencumbered Self’, Political Theory, 1984, vol. 12, pp. 81–96, repr. in R.E. Goodin and
P. Pettit (eds), Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Anthology. In
Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, Sandel advances his views
indirectly by way of criticism of Kant, J.S. Mill and Rawls. What
story does he tell of allegiance or patriotism – of whatever we
may identify as the sentiment distinctive of identiﬁcation with a
political community? On my reading: none. He tells us about family
life, supposing this to be analogous to the state in respect of the
relation of member to association – a hopeless strategy in the
absence of an argument that the state is a natural association.
G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, should be the canonical source,
explaining the metaphysics of social life in terms of existent
normative orders being structures of the free will.
G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right. In respect of ethical life generally see §149, ‘The individual ﬁnds his liberation in duty’. Applying
this thought to family life, he writes of marriage partners, that ‘In
this respect [they give up “their natural and individual personalities”] their union is a self-limitation, but since they attain their

367

NOTES

24
25
26

27

28

29
30
31
32
33

34
35
36

37
38
39
40

41
42
43

substantial self-consciousness within it, it is in fact their liberation.’ (§162).
Ibid., Preface, p. 20.
T. McPherson, Political Obligation, London, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1967, p. 64.
H. Pitkin, ‘Obligation and Consent’, American Political Science
Review, 1965, vols LIX(4), and LX(1), repr. in P. Laslett, W.G. Runciman and Q. Skinner (eds), Philosophy, Politics and Society, Fourth
Series, Oxford, Blackwell, 1972, cited at p. 78.
I stress: ‘those I have dubbed “communitarians”.’ As I have
remarked several times before, I don’t purport to identify a speciﬁc
school of thinkers, nor implicate speciﬁc authors beyond those to
whom I refer explicitly.
For readers who are sceptical of my invocation of Hegel, I recommend that they study §§129–35 of the Philosophy of Right, noting in
particular his claim that ‘The right of the subjective will is that
whatever it is to recognize as valid should be perceived by it as
good,’ Hegel, The Philosophy of Right, §132.
J.-J. Rousseau, A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, pp. 93–4.
Ibid., p. 96.
T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 17, p. 227.
All these phrases are used in the Second Treatise at §95.
Rousseau may be. Hobbes and Locke are not, on my reading of
them. Since large interpretative questions are at stake, I shall
suppose that they are describing possible events. The hypothetical
version of the argument will be tackled later.
John Locke, Second Treatise, §119.
Ibid., §121.
Hume ﬁrst uses this argument in the Treatise, Bk III, §VIII. It is
repeated, forcefully, in his essay, ‘Of the Original Contract’, in D.
Hume, Essays.
J. Locke, Second Treatise, §121.
D. Hume, ‘Of the Original Contract’, in Essays, p. 462.
P. Singer, Democracy and Disobedience, pp. 45–59.
Ibid., pp. 48–9. As a reading of Locke this is unconvincing. He
cannot be supposing that one is thinking of his obligations all the
time that he is accepting the beneﬁts of the state, or worse, all
the time that he is not dissenting.
Ibid., p. 50.
This is the theme of Part II of Singer’s book.
The story is told by P. Singer, Democracy and Disobedience, pp.
53–4.

368

NOTES

44 According to Jonathan Wolff, this is ‘the central problem of political obligation . . . [that of] accounting for the obligations of those
who do not consent’, ‘What is the Problem of Political Obligation?’,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1990/1, vol. XCI, p. 154. I
agree. This is the hardest and most important problem concerning
political obligation because the onus of justiﬁcation is placed on
the state. By contrast, where actual consent of some variety is
attested, the burden of proof is on those who would deny the normal implications of consent – which is not to say the issue is
unproblematic, as we have seen.
45 R. Dworkin, ‘The Original Position’, in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading
Rawls, p. 18.
46 This story has its origins in Hobbes’s Leviathan, Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origins of Inequality and James Mill’s democratic
reworking of Hobbes in his Essay on Government. It echoes elements of Nozick’s argument in Anarchy, State and Utopia, Part I. In
recent times, Jean Hampton has done most to revivify this traditional style of argument, see J. Hampton, Hobbes and the Social
Contract Tradition; Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986
and Political Philosophy, Boulder, Col., Westview Press, 1997, Ch.
3.
47 H.L.A. Hart, ‘Are there any Natural Rights?’, cited from J. Waldron
(ed.), Theories of Rights, p. 85; J. Rawls, ‘Legal Obligation and the
Duty of Fair Play’, in S. Hook (ed.), Law and Philosophy, New York,
New York University Press, 1964; R. Nozick, Anarchy, State and
Utopia, pp. 90–5; A.J. Simmons, Moral Principles and Political
Obligations, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1979, Ch.
V; G. Klosko, The Principle of Fairness and Political Obligation,
Lanham, Md, Rowan and Littleﬁeld, 1992.
48 J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, p. 93.
49 Claudia Card notices the inaptness of speaking of debts of gratitude, claiming that the idea is paradoxical, hence metaphorical.
See C. Card, ‘Gratitude and Obligation’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, 1988, vol. 25, pp. 115–27.
50 This summarizes the argument of A.J. Simmons, Moral Principles,
pp. 166–7.
51 ‘We are presumed to have a kind of control over our actions that we
do not have over our feelings; we can, at least normally, try to act in
speciﬁed ways where we cannot try to have certain emotions or
feelings (in the same way). And surely part of the point of a moral
requirement is that its content be the sort of thing which we can, at
least normally, try to accomplish’, ibid., p. 167.

369

NOTES

52 A.J. Simmons, Moral Principles, p. 189. This argument is rejected by
A.D.M. Walker, ‘Political Obligation and the Argument from Gratitude’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1988, vol. 17. Walker’s paper is
unusual in modern times in that it defends the gratitude argument.
Most writers see it as a soft target.
53 This is Walker’s view, ‘Gratitude’, p. 196.
54 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Part 1, Ch. 15, p. 209.

7

Democracy

1 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. XIX, cited at p. 242. Hobbes’s famous
argument that the sovereign is the representative of the people, the
actor who puts into effect the will of the subject authors, is outlined in Ch. XVI and is the major innovation of Leviathan. For
James Mill’s views, see Essay on Government (1819), Indianapolis,
Liberal Arts Press, 1955, pp. 60–1.
2 J. Locke, Second Treatise, §138.
3 J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, p. 86. This
remark, as with so many of the sayings which attest Rousseau’s
genius, is cast to the swine with an insouciance which deﬁes further elaboration. But Hegel picked it up (characteristically without acknowledgement) in one of the most famous and inﬂuential
passages of The Phenomenology of Spirit, the dialectic of ‘Master
and Slave’, which many believe to have been an enormous inﬂuence
on Marx. See Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1979, ¶178–96, pp. 111–19.
4 This is the implication of the ﬁrst sentence of Bk I, Ch. VI, ‘The
Social Compact’, of the The Social Contract: ‘I suppose men to have
reached the point at which the obstacles in the way of their preservation in the state of nature show their power of resistance to be
greater than the resources at the disposal of the individual for his
maintenance in that state.’
5 Ibid., Bk I, Ch. VI, p. 175.
6 J.-J. Rousseau, Discourse, p. 54.
7 J.-J. Rousseau, Social Contract, Bk I, Ch. VII, p. 177.
8 Ibid., Bk I, Ch. VIII, p. 178.
9 See the discussion at Bk II, Ch. IV (and the comical footnote),
pp. 186–9.
10 Ibid., Bk I, Ch. IX, p. 181.
11 Ibid., Bk II, Ch. XI, p. 204.
12 There is a large modern literature on this topic, beginning with

370

NOTES

13
14

15

16
17

18
19
20
21

22

Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York,
Harper and Row, 1957. There is a useful summary of arguments pro
and con in Loren E. Lomasky and Geoffrey Brennan, ‘Is there a
Duty to Vote?’: Social Philosophy and Policy, 2000, vol. 17(1), pp.
65–74.
J.-J. Rousseau, Social Contract, Bk II, Ch. III, p. 185.
J.-J. Rousseau, Ch. 2 of the original draft (the ‘Geneva Manuscript’) of the Social Contract, published in The Social Contract and
Discourses as ‘The General Society of the Human Race’, cited at p.
160.
These and cognate terms excited much interest in the 1950s and
60s. Historians or elderly philosophers should be able to
reconstruct the debates without looking up the references: is ‘the
common good’ the familiar and universal nominalization of purposes that politicians commend or attitudes that they express (and
if so, which?), or is it descriptive of policy objectives (and if
so, what?). These questions should still excite interest (= philosophers’ attention). That they don’t, is, I suspect, due to the thoroughness of Brian Barry’s investigations in Political Argument,
London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965, Chs X–XV. In political
philosophy, careful linguistic analysis is still a valuable technique
since its subject matter, political language, is (and will forever
remain) a domain ruled by rhetorical techniques. The settling of
questions of meaning or the exposure of concepts as essentially
contestable is not the end of philosophy since conventional usage
may embody falsehoods and contests which seem endemic may turn
out to be resolvable.
J.S. Mill, On Liberty, Ch. II, pp. 80–9.
This is Condorcet’s result. It is presented as a valuable supplement
to Rousseau’s argument by Brian Barry, Political Argument, Note
(A), pp. 292–3. Barry refers to the full discussion in Duncan Black,
Theory of Committees and Elections, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1958, pp. 164–5.
T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 16.
J.-J. Rousseau, The Social Contract, Bk II, Ch. X, p. 203.
James Mill, Essay on Government, Ch. VI, p. 66.
Benjamin Barber takes the prospect of more direct democracy seriously in Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age,
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984, though he is not an
advocate of telephone voting.
John Stuart Mill saw real problems here. He believed ﬁrmly that
electors should choose representatives who were wiser than

371

NOTES

23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

32

33

34

themselves, but ‘how are they to judge, except by the standard of
their own opinions . . . the tests by which an ordinary man can judge
beforehand of mere ability are very imperfect’, Considerations on
Representative Government (1861), Ch. XII, in J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative Government, p. 318. Interestingly, one
element of his solution to this problem involved qualiﬁcations for
voting powers among the electorate, the educated having multiple
votes.
Plato, The Republic, trans. H.P.D. Lee, Harmondsworth, Penguin,
1955, Bk 7.
T. Hobbes, Leviathan, Ch. 3, p. 97.
J.S. Mill, Representative Government, pp. 249–50.
Rousseau, The Social Contract, Bk I, Ch. 6, p. 174.
Ibid., Bk II, Ch. IV, p. 187.
Ibid., Bk II, Ch. IV, p. 186.
J. Waldron, Law and Disagreement, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1999,
p. 15.
As Rousseau does. The Social Contract, Bk IV, Ch. VIII, p. 276.
This issue was raised by J. Cohen and J. Rogers, in On Democracy,
Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1983, pp. 154–7. A powerful case in
favour of restricting contributions was made by Ronald Dworkin in
‘The Curse of American Politics’, New York Review of Books,
October 17, 1996, vol. XLIII(16), pp. 19–25 and the thought that
money is a curse on democracy is endorsed by John Rawls in ‘The
Idea of Public Reason Revisited’, in Collected Papers, ed. S. Freeman, Cambridge, Mass. and London, Harvard University Press,
1999, p. 580.
Berlin’s pluralism surfaces in many of his essays and plays a notable role in the argument of ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’. For a useful
survey, analysis and endorsement of Berlin’s views which draws
together much of this diffuse material, see John Gray, Isaiah
Berlin, London, Harper Collins, 1995, esp. Chs 2 and 6.
I distinguish value pluralism and value difference, since the distinction signals different strategies for resolving or accommodating the disagreements within the forums of democracy.
It is hard to chart the modern ancestry of this movement. Obvious
sources include Jürgen Habermas’s discourse ethics, notably The
Theory of Communicative Action, Boston, Mass., Beacon Press,
1984; Rawls’s ‘Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory’, Journal
of Philosophy, 1980, vol. 77, pp. 515–72, repr. in Collected Papers, ed.
Freeman, pp. 303–58; and T.M. Scanlon, ‘Contractualism and Utilitarianism’, in A.K. Sen and B. Williams (eds), Utilitarianism and

372

NOTES

35

36
37
38

39
40

41

Beyond, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982, pp. 103–28.
Notable contributions include Joshua Cohen, ‘Deliberation and
Democratic Legitimacy’, in A. Hamlin and P. Pettit (eds), The Good
Polity, Oxford, Blackwell, 1989, pp. 17–34; ‘Procedure and Substance in Deliberative Democracy’, in S. Benhabib (ed.), Democracy
and Difference, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1996,
pp. 95–119; and A. Gutmann and D. Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1996.
Rawls ﬁrst signals the importance of disagreement in his account
of varying ‘thick’ conceptions of the good in A Theory of Justice.
In subsequent essays (reconstructed as a monograph in Political
Liberalism, New York, Columbia University Press, 1993,
republished in J. Rawls, Collected Papers, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1999, Rawls suggests that the divergent
elements of pluralism include both philosophical (normative) theories, including liberalism and utilitarianism, philosophical disputes, e.g. that between values of equality and liberty, and most
serious of all, religious doctrines of the sort that generated the
sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Wars of Religion in Europe
(and fuel present-day conﬂicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Algeria,
Nigeria, Indonesia, India the former Yugoslavia and on and on . . .).
A. Gutmann and D. Thompson, Democracy, p. 53.
J. Cohen, ‘Deliberation’, p. 17.
J. Rawls, Political Liberalism, Lecture VI, pp. 212–54; ‘The Idea of
Public Reason Revisited’, University of Chicago Law Review, 1997,
vol. 64, pp. 765–807, repr. in Collected Papers, pp. 573–615.
A. Gutmann and D. Thompson, Democracy, pp. 63–9, cited at pp. 64
and 65.
John Rawls whistles in the wind in claiming that the right of a
woman to an abortion in the ﬁrst trimester is established by the
political value of the equality of women as equal citizens. See the
footnote discussion at pp. 243–4 of Political Liberalism. This is a
strong consideration, but one does not need to look far to ﬁnd
reasonable citizens who accept this value but do not ﬁnd it decisive
in settling the matter.
The most impressive statement of a procedural conception of democracy has been Robert Dahl, most fully in Democracy and its
Critics, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1989. Dahl’s views have
been criticized by J. Cohen, ‘Procedure and Substance in Deliberative Democracy’, pp. 97–9 and D. Gutmann and D. Thompson,
Democracy, pp. 27–33.

373

Bibliography

Anscombe, E., ‘On the Frustration of the Majority by the Fulﬁlment
of the Majority’s Will’, Analysis, 1976, vol. 36, pp. 161–8.
Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics (many editions).
—— Politics, trans. E. Barker, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1946.
Barber, B., Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age,
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984.
Barry, B., Political Argument, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1965.
—— ‘Is it Better to be Powerful or Lucky?’, in B. Barry, Democracy,
Power and Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989.
Beitz, C.R., Political Theory and International Relations, Princeton,
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1979.
Benn, S. I., A Theory of Freedom, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1988.
Bentham, J., An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart, London, Methuen, 1982.
—— ‘Anarchical Fallacies’, see J. Waldron (ed.), Nonsense upon Stilts.
Bergmann, F., On Being Free, Notre Dame, University of Notre Dame
Press, 1977.

375

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Berlin, I., ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’, in Four Essays on Liberty,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1969.
Black, D., Theory of Committees and Elections, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1958.
Brandt, R.B., Ethical Theory, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall,
1959.
—— A Theory of the Good and the Right, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1979.
Braybrooke, D., Meeting Needs, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University
Press, 1987.
Buchanan, A., ‘Liberalism and Group Rights’, in J.L. Coleman and A.
Buchanan (eds), In Harm’s Way: Essays in Honor of Joel Feinberg,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 1–15.
Burroughs, W., Junkie, Paris, The Olympia Press, 1966.
Campbell, T., The Left and Rights, London, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1983.
Card, C., ‘Gratitude and Obligation’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, 1988, vol. 25, pp. 115–27.
Carter, A., The Political Theory of Anarchism, London, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1971.
Cranston, M., What are Human Rights?, London, Bodley Head, 1973.
Cohen, G.A., ‘Self-ownership, World-ownership, and Equality: Part II’,
Social Philosophy and Policy, 1986, vol. 3.
—— ‘Capitalism, Freedom and the Proletariat’, in A. Ryan (ed.), The
Idea of Freedom, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1979.
Cohen, J., ‘Deliberation and Democratic Legitimacy’, in A. Hamlin
and P. Pettit (eds), The Good Polity, Oxford, Blackwell, 1989, pp.
17–34.
—— ‘Procedure and Substance in Deliberative Democracy’, in S. Benhabib (ed.), Democracy and Difference, Princeton, N.J., Princeton
University Press, 1996, pp. 95–119.
—— and Rogers, J., On Democracy, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1983.
Dagger, R., Civic Virtues: Rights, Citizenship and Republican Liberalism, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Dahl, R.K., Democracy and its Critics, New Haven, Yale University
Press, 1989.
Daniels, N. (ed.), Reading Rawls, Oxford, Blackwell, 1975.
Danto, A.C. ‘Constructing an Epistemology of Human Rights: A
Pseudo-problem?’, in E.F. Paul, J. Paul and F.D. Miller Jr. (eds),
Human Rights, Oxford, Blackwell, 1984.
Deutscher, I., Stalin: A Political Biography, rev. edn, Harmondsworth,
Penguin, 1966.

376

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Devlin, P., The Enforcement of Morals, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1965.
Downs, A., An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York, Harper and
Row, 1957.
Dunn, J., The Political Thought of John Locke, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1969.
Dworkin, R., ‘The Original Position’, in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading
Rawls, pp. 16–53.
—— Taking Rights Seriously, London, Duckworth, 1977.
—— ‘Rights as Trumps’, in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights,
adapted from R. Dworkin, ‘Is there a Right to Pornography?’,
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1981, vol. 1, pp. 177–212, repr. in
R. Dworkin, A Matter of Principle, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press, 1985, pp. 335–72.
—— ‘What is Equality? Part I: Equality of Welfare; Part II: Equality
of Resources’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1981, vol. 10, pp. 185–
246, 283–345.
—— ‘Liberal Community’, California Law Review, 1989, vol. 77, pp.
479–504.
—— ‘The Curse of American Politics’, New York Review of Books,
October 17, 1996, vol. XLIII(16), pp. 19–25.
Elster, J., Sour Grapes, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1983.
Feinberg, J., Social Philosophy, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall,
1973.
—— Harm to Others, vol. 1 of The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law,
New York, Oxford University Press, 1984.
Finnis, J., Natural Law and Natural Right, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1980.
Fitzjames Stephen, Lord Justice J., Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, London, Smith, Elder, 1863, new edn, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1967.
Foot, P. (ed.), Theories of Ethics, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1967.
Frankfurt, H., ‘Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person’,
Journal of Philosophy, 1971, vol. LXVII(1), pp. 5–20, repr. in G.
Watson (ed.), Free Will, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1982.
Fuller, L, The Morality of Law, New Haven, Yale University Press,
1969.
Galston, W.A., Liberal Purposes, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1991.
Gauthier, D., ‘David Hume, Contractarian’, The Philosophical Review,
1979, vol. LXXXVIII, pp. 3–38.

377

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gert, B., ‘Hobbes and Psychological Egoism’, Journal of the History of
Ideas, 1967, vol. XXVIII.
Gewirth, A., ‘Are there any Absolute Rights?’, Philosophical
Quarterly, 1981, vol. 31, repr. in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights.
Godwin, W., Enquiry concerning Political Justice, Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 1971.
Goodin, R.E., Utilitarianism as a Public Philosophy, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
—— and Pettit, P. (eds), Contemporary Political Philosophy: An
Anthology, Oxford, Blackwell, 1997.
Graham, G., Contemporary Social Philosophy, Oxford, Blackwell, 1988.
—— ‘Freedom and Democracy’, Journal of Applied Philosophy, 1992,
vol. 9, pp. 149–60.
Gray, J., Isaiah Berlin, London, Harper Collins, 1995.
Green, L. The Authority of the State, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1988.
Grifﬁn, J., Well-being, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1986.
Gutmann, A. and Thompson, D., Democracy and Disagreement, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1996.
Habermas, J., The Theory of Communicative Action, Boston, Mass.,
Beacon Press, 1984.
Hampton, J., Hobbes and the Social Contract Tradition, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1986.
—— Political Philosophy, Boulder, Co., Westview Press, 1997.
Hardin, R., Morality within the Limits of Reason, Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1988.
Harrington, J., The Commonwealth of Oceana and A System of Politics
ed. J.G.A. Pocock, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Harrison, J., Hume’s Theory of Justice, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1981.
Harrison, R., Bentham, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983.
Harsanyi, J.C., ‘Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and the Theory
of Risk Taking’, Journal of Political Economy, 1953, vol. 61.
—— ‘Morality and the Theory of Rational Behaviour’, in A.K. Sen
and B. Williams (eds), Utilitarianism and Beyond.
Hart, H.L.A., ‘Are there any Natural Rights?’, Philosophical Review,
1955, vol. LXIV(2), pp. 175–91, repr. in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of
Rights.
—— The Concept of Law, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1961.
—— Law, Liberty and Morality, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1963.
—— ‘Rawls on Liberty and its Priority’, University of Chicago Law
Review, 1973, vol. 40, pp. 534–55, repr. in N. Daniels (ed.), Reading
Rawls, pp. 230–52.

378

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hayek, F.A., The Constitution of Liberty, London, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1960.
—— The Road to Serfdom, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974.
—— Law, Legislation and Liberty, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1982
(published in three vols, 1973, 1976 and 1979).
Hegel, G.W.F., The Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1977.
—— Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. A.W. Wood, trans. H.B.
Nisbet, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Hobbes, T., Man and Citizen, ed. B. Gert, Brighton, Harvester Press,
1978.
—— Leviathan, ed. C. B. Macpherson, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1985.
Hohfeld, W. E., Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial
Reasoning, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1923.
Honoré, A.M., ‘Ownership’, in A.G. Guest (ed.), Oxford Essays in
Jurisprudence, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1961.
Hook, S. (ed.), Law and Philosophy, New York, New York University
Press, 1964.
Hume, D., Enquiries, concerning Human Understanding and the Principles of Morals, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1902.
—— Essays, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1963.
—— A Treatise of Human Nature, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1965.
Kagan, S., The Limits of Morality, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989.
Kant, I., Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. as The
Moral Law by H.B. Paton, London, Hutchinson, 1969.
—— The Metaphysics of Morals, trans. M. Gregor, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1991.
—— Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. P. Guyer and A.W. Wood,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998. Academy edn, Kritik
der reinen Vernunft (1. Auﬂage), ed. B. Erdmann, Kant’s gesammelte
Schriften, herausgegeben von der Königlich Preußischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Band IV (edited by the Royal Prussion Academy of Sciences, vol. IV), Berlin, Georg Reimer, 1911.
Klosko, G., The Principle of Fairness and Political Obligation,
Lanham, Md, Rowan and Littleﬁeld, 1992.
Knowles, D., ‘A Re-formulation of the Harm Principle’, Political
Theory, 1978, vol. 6, pp. 233–46.
—— ‘Autonomy and Side-constraints’, Mind, 1979, vol. LXXXVIII, pp.
263–5.
—— ‘Hegel on Property and Personality’, Philosophical Quarterly,
1983, vol. 33, pp. 45–62.

379

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Knowles, D., ‘Freedom and Democracy Revisited’, Journal of Applied
Philosophy, 1995, vol. 12, pp. 283–92.
—— ‘Conservative Utilitarianism’, Utilitas, 2000, vol. 12, pp. 155–75.
Kymlicka, W., Liberalism, Community and Culture, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1989.
—— Multicultural Citizenship, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1995.
Lessnoff, M.H., ‘Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy’, Political
Studies, 1979, vol. XXVII, pp. 594–602.
—— Political Philosophers of the Twentieth Century, Oxford, Blackwell, 1999.
Lipsey, R., Introduction to Positive Economics, London, Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, 1965.
Locke, J., Two Treatises of Government, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1960.
—— Essay concerning Human Understanding (many editions).
Lomasky, L.E. and Brennan, G., ‘Is there a Duty to Vote?’, Social
Philosophy Policy, 2000, vol. 17(1), pp. 65–74.
Lyons, D., Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1965.
—— ‘Utility and Rights’, in J.R. Pennock and J.W. Chapman (eds),
Ethics, Economics and the Law: Nomos XXIV, New York, New York
University Press, 1982, pp. 107–38 and repr. in J. Waldron (ed.),
Theories of Rights, and D. Lyons, Rights Welfare, and Mill’s Moral
Theory, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1994.
MacCallum, G.C., ‘Negative and Positive Freedom’, Philosophical
Review, 1967, vol. 76, pp. 312–14.
Macintyre, A., After Virtue, London, Duckworth, 1981.
Mackie, J.L., ‘Can There be a Rights-based Moral Theory?’, in P. A.
French, T. E. Uehling, Jr and H. K. Wettstein (eds), Studies in Ethical Theory, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 1978, vol. 3, repr. in J.
Waldron (ed.), Theories of Rights.
—— Hume’s Moral Thought, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1980.
MacPherson, C.B., Democratic Theory: Essays in Retrieval, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1973.
McPherson, T., Political Obligation, London, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1967.
Marx, K., 1844 Manuscripts, in Early Writings, trans. R. Livingstone
and G. Benton, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1975, pp. 328–9.
Milgram, S., Obedience to Authority, London, Tavistock, 1974.
—— ‘Obedience’, in Richard L. Gregory (ed.), The Oxford Companion
to the Mind, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1987.

380

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Mill, James, Essay on Government (1819), Indianapolis, Liberal Arts
Press, 1955.
Mill, J.S., Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative Government, London,
Dent, 1968.
—— Utilitarianism, in J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative Government.
—— On Liberty, in J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative
Government.
—— Considerations on Representative Government (1861) in J.S. Mill,
Utilitarianism, Liberty, Representative Government.
—— ‘M. de Tocqueville on Democracy in America’ (1840), repr. in J.B.
Schneewind (ed.), Mill’s Ethical Writings, New York, Collier, 1965,
pp. 105–58.
Miller, D., Social Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1976.
—— Philosophy and Ideology in Hume’s Political Thought, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1981.
—— Anarchism, London, J.M. Dent, 1984.
Moore, G.E., Principia Ethica, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1903.
Mulhall, S. and A. Swift, Liberals and Communitarians, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1992.
Nagel, T., ‘Rawls on Justice’, Philosophical Review, 1973, vol. LXXXII,
pp. 220–34, repr. in N. Daniels, Reading Rawls.
—— Equality and Partiality, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991.
Nozick, R., Anarchy, State and Utopia, New York, Basic Books, 1974.
Nussbaum, M., Sex and Social Justice, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1999.
—— and A.K. Sen, (eds), The Quality of Life, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1992.
Oakeshott, M., Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays, London,
Methuen, 1967.
O’Neill, J., Ecology, Policy and Politics, London, Routledge, 1993.
O’Neill, O., Faces of Hunger: An Essay on Poverty, Justice and
Development, London, Allen and Unwin, 1986.
—— ‘Kant on Duties Regarding Nonrational Nature’, Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 1998, Supp. vol. LXXII, pp. 211–28.
Parekh, B. (ed.), Bentham’s Political Thought, London, Croom Helm,
1973.
Pettit, P., Republicanism: A Theory of Government and Freedom,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997.
Pitkin, H., ‘Obligation and Consent’, American Political Science Review, 1965, vols LIX(4) and LX(1), repr. in P. Laslett, W.G. Runciman

381

BIBLIOGRAPHY

and Q. Skinner (eds), Philosophy, Politics and Society: Fourth
Series, Oxford, Blackwell, 1972.
Plant, R., Modern Political Thought, Oxford, Blackwell, 1991.
Plato, The Republic, trans. H.P.D. Lee, Harmondsworth, Penguin,
1955.
Pogge, T., Realising Rawls, Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press,
1989.
Railton, P., ‘Alienation, Consequentialism, and the Demands of Morality’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1984, vol. 13, pp. 134–71, repr.
in S. Schefﬂer(ed.), Consequentialism and its Critics.
Raphael, D.D., Problems of Political Philosophy, London, Macmillan,
1970.
Rawls, J., ‘Two Concepts of Rules’, Philosophical Review, 1955, vol. 64,
pp. 3–32, repr. in Collected Papers, pp. 20–46, and P. Foot (ed.), Theories of Ethics.
—— A Theory of Justice, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1972.
—— ‘Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory’, Journal of Philosophy, 1980, vol. 77, pp. 515–72, repr. in Collected Papers, pp. 303–58.
—— Political Liberalism, New York, Columbia University Press, 1993.
—— ‘The Idea of Public Reason Revisited’, University of Chicago Law
Review, 1997, vol. 64, pp. 765–807, repr. in Collected Papers, pp.
573–615.
—— ‘Preface for the French Edition of A Theory of Justice’, repr. in
Collected Papers, pp. 415–20.
—— Collected Papers, ed. S. Freeman, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press, 1999.
Raz, J., ‘Rights-based Moralities’, in J. Waldron (ed.), Theories of
Rights.
—— The Morality of Freedom, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1986.
Reiman, J., In Defense of Political Philosophy, New York, Harper and
Row, 1972.
Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution
(CMD 247) 1957 (The Wolfenden Report).
Rescher, N., Welfare: The Social Issue in Philosophical Perspective,
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1972.
Robbins, L., The Nature and Signiﬁcance of Economic Science,
London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1932.
Roth, K., ‘The Court the US Doesn’t Want’, New York Review of Books,
November 18, 1998, vol. XLV(18), pp. 45–7.
Rousseau, J.-J., The Social Contract and Discourses, London, Dent, 1973.
Sagoff, M., The Economy of the Earth, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988.

382

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sandel, M., Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
—— ‘The Procedural Republic and the Unencumbered Self’, Political
Theory, 1984, vol. 12, pp. 81–96, repr. in R.E. Goodin and P. Pettit
(eds), Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Anthology, pp. 247–55.
Scanlon, T.M., ‘Rights, Goals and Fairness’, Erkenntnis, 1977, vol. II,
pp. 81–94.
—— T.M., ‘Contractualism and Utilitarianism’, in A.K. Sen and B.
Williams (eds), Utilitarianism and Beyond.
—— What We Owe to Each Other, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press, 1999.
Schefﬂer, S. (ed.), Consequentialism and its Critics, Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 1988.
Schier, F., ‘The Kantian Gulag’, in D. Knowles and J. Skorupski (eds),
Virtue and Taste, Oxford, Blackwell, 1993, pp. 1–18.
Schwartz, L.B., ‘Morals Offences and the Model Penal Code’, Columbia Law Review, 1963, vol. LXIII.
Sen, A.K., ‘Equality of What?’, The Tanner Lectures on Human
Values, vol. 1, ed. S.M. McMurrin, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1980, pp. 195–220, repr. in R.E. Goodin and P. Pettit
(eds), Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Anthology.
—— ‘Capability and Well-being’, in M.C. Nussbaum and A.K. Sen
(eds), The Quality of Life, pp. 30–53.
—— Inequality Re-examined, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1992.
—— and B. Williams, (eds), Utilitarianism and Beyond, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Sher, G., Desert, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1987.
—— Beyond Neutrality, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Shue, H., Basic Rights, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press,
1980, excerpted in R.E. Goodin and P. Pettit (eds), Contemporary
Political Philosophy: An Anthology, pp. 341–55.
Simmons, A.J., Moral Principles and Political Obligations, Princeton,
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1979.
Singer, P., Democracy and Disobedience, London, Oxford University
Press, 1974.
—— Practical Ethics, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1979.
—— ‘Famine, Afﬂuence and Morality’, Philosophy and Public Affairs,
1992, vol. 1, pp. 229–43.
Skinner, Q., ‘The Idea of Negative Liberty’, in R. Rorty, J.B. Schneewind, and Q. Skinner (eds), Philosophy in History, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Skorupski, J., John Stuart Mill, London, Routledge, 1989.

383

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Smart, J.J.C., ‘Extreme and Restricted Utilitarianism’, Philosophical
Quarterly, 1956, vol. 6, pp. 344–54, repr. in P. Foot (ed.), Theories of
Ethics.
—— ‘An Outline of a System of Utilitarian Ethics’, in J.J.C. Smart
and B. Williams, Utilitarianism: For and Against, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Spitz, J.-F., La Liberté Politique, Paris, Presses Universitaires de
France, 1995.
Steiner, H, ‘Individual Liberty’, Aristotelian Society Proceedings, 1975,
vol. LXXV, pp. 35–50.
—— An Essay on Rights, Oxford, Blackwell, 1994.
Strawson, P.F., ‘Social Morality and Individual Ideal’, Philosophy,
1961, vol. XXXVI, repr. in P.F. Strawson, Freedom and Resentment,
London, Methuen, 1974, pp. 26–44.
Sumner, L.W., The Moral Foundation of Rights, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1987.
Taylor, C., ‘Responsibility for Self’, in A. O. Rorty (ed.), The Identities
of Persons, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1976, pp. 281–
99, repr. in G. Watson (ed.), Free Will.
—— Philosophical Papers, 2 vols, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1985.
—— ‘What is Human Agency?’, in Philosophical Papers, vol. I, pp. 15–44.
—— ‘Atomism’, in C. Taylor, Philosophical Papers: 2, pp. 187–210.
—— ‘Cross-purposes: the Liberal–Communitarian Debate’, in N.
Rosenblum (ed.), Liberalism and the Moral Life, Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press, 1989.
—— Sources of the Self, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Taylor, M., Anarchy and Cooperation, London, Wiley, 1976; 2nd edn.
published as The Possibility of Cooperation, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1987.
—— Community, Anarchy and Liberty, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1982.
Thomson, J.J., The Realm of Rights, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press, 1990.
Tuck, R., Natural Rights Theories, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1979.
Tully, J., A Discourse on Property, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1980.
Waldron, J. (ed.), Theories of Rights, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1984.
—— (ed.), Nonsense upon Stilts: Bentham, Burke and Marx on the
Rights of Man, London, Methuen, 1987.

384

BIBLIOGRAPHY

—— The Right to Private Property, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1988.
—— ‘Rushdie and Religion’, in Liberal Rights, ﬁrst published as ‘Too
Important for Tact’, in the Times Literary Supplement, March
10–16, 1989, pp. 248, 260.
—— Liberal Rights, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1993.
—— ‘Participation: The Right of Rights’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1998, vol. XCVIII, pp. 307–37.
—— Law and Disagreement, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1999.
Walker, A.D.M., ‘Political Obligation and the Argument from
Gratitude’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1988, vol. 17, pp. 191–211.
Walzer, M., Spheres of Justice, Oxford, Blackwell, 1983.
Watson, G., ‘Free Agency’, Journal of Philosophy, 1975, vol. 72,
pp. 205–20, repr. in G. Watson (ed.), Free Will.
—— (ed.), Free Will, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1982.
Weber, M., From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans. and ed. H.H.
Gerth and C.W. Mills, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1946.
Wedgwood, Ralph, ‘Why Promote People’s Freedom? (unpublished).
Wenar, L., ‘Original Acquisition of Private Property’, Mind, 1998, vol.
107, pp. 799–819.
White, A.R., Modal Thinking, Oxford, Blackwell, 1971.
Wiggins, D., ‘The Claims of Need’, in Needs, Values, Truth, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1987.
Williams, B., ‘Toleration: An Impossible Virtue?’, in D. Heyd (ed.),
Toleration, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1996.
Wolf, S., Freedom within Reason, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1990.
Wolff, J., ‘What is the Problem of Political Obligation?’, Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 1990/1, vol. XCI.
Wolff, R.P., In Defense of Anarchism, 2nd edn, New York, Harper, 1976.
Wood, A.W., Hegel’s Ethical Thought, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
—— ‘Kant on Duties Regarding Nonrational Nature’, Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 1998, Supp. vol. LXXII, pp. 189–210.
Woodcock, G., Anarchism, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1963.
—— The Anarchist Reader, London, Fontana, 1977.

385

Index

anarchism 19, 58, 60, 248–50,
259–60; philosophical 253–4,
296–7
Anscombe, G.E.M. 344–5, 349
Aristotle 7, 167–8, 239, 353, 357,
365
atomism 6–7
authority, of the state 365; see
also political obligation
autonomy 40, 80, 89, 92–8, 159–65,
186, 253–4
Bakunin, M. 259
Barber, B. 371
Barry, B. 353, 361, 371
Beitz, C.R. 359
Benn, S. 89, 352
Bentham, J. 15, 17, 23–4, 37–8, 125,
136, 171, 344, 348–9, 355; on
democracy 61, 63–4, 308, 355;
feliciﬁc calculus 37, 42, 345

Bergmann, F. 352
Berlin, I. 70–1, 74–6, 78–9, 81–3,
88, 99, 105–6, 129–30, 329,
349–50, 372
Bettelheim, B. 94
Black, D. 371
Brandt, R. 345, 347
Braybrooke, D. 202–3, 361
Brent geese, black-bellied race of
66–7
Buchanan, A. 356–7
Burroughs, W. 354
Campbell, T.D. 356–7
Card, C. 369
Carter, A. 348, 366
Coates, B. xv
Cohen, G.A. 156, 350, 357
Cohen, J. 336, 373; and Rogers, J.
372
communitarianism 7–9, 12–13, 19,

387

INDEX

116–19, 151–2, 235–8, 248,
254–60
Condorcet, M.J. 371
conscientious (civil)
disobedience 245
consent: express 264–6;
hypothetical 276–8; quasiconsent 271–5, 297; tacit
266–71, 284–5; theories of
political obligation 19–20,
260–80, 284–5; see also
contract
conservatism 8, 53, 64–5, 317–18
Constant, B. 70
contract: hypothetical social
19–20, 216–21, 276–82; original
263–4; theories of political
obligation 216, 260–2; see also
consent
cost–beneﬁt analysis 42, 67–8
Cranston, M. 355
Dagger, R. 161, 357
Dahl, R. 373
Danto, A. 174–5, 358
democracy 19–21, 70, 88, 165, 247,
292–3, 299–341; and consent
271–5, 297; direct vs.
representative 307–11; and
equality 305–6, 316; and the
general will 307–11; and liberty
73–4, 99–100, 105–8, 303–5, 316;
and majority tyranny 73, 107–8,
127–8, 131, 304, 319–26;
utilitarian argument for 61–4,
308
desert: as a criterion of justice
18, 57–8, 232–5
Deutscher, I. 363
Devlin, P. 114–16, 354
diminishing marginal utility
53–5, 209
disability 208–10
Downs, A. 371
Dostoyevsky, F. 352
Dunn, J. 357
Dworkin, R. 117, 161, 163, 172,

388

216, 276, 344, 349, 358, 362,
364–5, 369, 372
Elster, J. 362
environmentalism 42, 66–7
equality 18, 70, 53–4, 206–14,
302–3; before the law 306;
of capabilities 210–12; political
305, 310; of resources 206–8,
229–30, 305–6; and utility 53–4,
209–10
ethics: contractualist 11;
foundationalism in 5–6;
Hegelian 255–6; Kantian 11;
methodology of 3–15; and
political philosophy 2–3;
utilitarian 23–68
Evans, G. 24, 344
fairness 29; Hart’s principle of
20, 283–8; see also Rawls, J.,
justice as
Federalists 70
Feinberg, J. 82–3, 110, 119–20, 351,
353–4
feminism 262
Finnis, J. 355
Frankfurt, H. 79, 351–2
freedom 72; of action 79–80,
89–92; see also liberty
Fuller, L. 365
Galston, W.A. 362
Gauthier, D. 347
Gert, B. 347
Gewirth, A. 358
Godwin, W. 259, 348
Goodin, R. 344
Graham, G. 112, 353
gratitude 20, 288–96
Gray, J. 82, 351, 372
Green, L. 365, 367
Green, T.H. 70
Grifﬁn, J. 40, 346, 349, 361
Grotius, H. 262, 357
Gutmann, A. and Thompson, D.
335–7, 373

INDEX

Habermas, J. 372
Hampton, J. 366, 369
happiness see hedonism
Hardin, R. 347
harm 109–12, 115–16, 120–1,
199–20; harm principle 108–9,
131, 196, 319–21, 325
Harrington, J. 306, 351
Harrison, J. 347
Harrison, R. 348
Harsanyi, J.C. 363
Hart, H.L.A. 20, 159, 346, 354–5,
357, 363, 365–6, 369; principle of
fairness 283–8; legal moralism
115–17
Hayek, F.A. 18, 70, 188–92, 360
hedonism 38–41
Hegel, G.W.F. 5, 7–8, 13, 79–80,
87, 89–90, 168, 177, 214, 230,
258–9, 343, 346, 358–61, 365,
367–8, 370; on ethical life 255–6;
on needs 196; on private
property 186–7, 327; on rights
135, 149–50
Hobbes, T. 6, 12, 20, 58–60, 74,
83–4, 92, 168, 194, 249–50, 252,
317, 338, 344, 347–9, 355, 358,
360, 362, 366, 368–72; and the
duties of the citizen 245–7, 322;
on egoism 225; on the forms of
sovereignty 300–1, 307–8, 312;
on gratitude 293; on power 221;
on property 193; on rights
139–40; social contract theory
216, 261, 263, 278–80
Hohfeld, W. 138–9, 145–7, 355
Honoré, A. 356
Hume, D. 15, 61, 64–6, 368; on
allegiance 58–9; on justice
52–8, 181, 205, 230, 347–8, 361;
on property 191,195; on social
contract theory 268–71, 282–3,
285, 297
individualism 5–9, 12–13, 150–4,
171; J.S. Mill’s account of 46–8
interests 50, 110, 165–9

Joseph, K. 188
justice: as desert 57–8, 232–5; in
distribution 18, 51–8, 177–238;
entitlement theory of 177–88;
as equality 53–4, 206–14; and
needs 54–7, 195–212; Rawls’s
theory of 214–38; retributive
9–10; utilitarian account of
51–8
Kagan, S. 349
Kant, I. 5, 8, 79, 90–1, 93–4, 97–8,
105, 107, 162, 186, 216, 231, 248,
258–9, 290, 343–4, 346, 351, 367
Klosko, G. 284, 369
Knowles, D. 347, 353, 359–10
Kropotkin, P.A. 259
Kymlicka, W. 353, 356, 365
legal moralism 113–19
Lessnoff, M.H. 360
liberalism 5–6, 70–1
libertarianism 70–1
liberty 16–17, 69–132; and
anarchy 252; civil 105, 107–8,
304; concept of 71–85;
conﬂicting claims to 328; and
democracy 73–4, 99–100, 105–8,
127–8, 302, 309–10; and
distributive justice 182; as
empowerment 78, 85; freedom
of speech 45–6, 89, 122, 152; and
licence 72; Mill’s harm
principle as a guardian of 48–9,
108–13, 115–16, 119–20, 122, 129,
131; moral 98–100, 303–4; and
need 201–2; negative 74–8, 86,
89, 92, 106; political 99, 304–5;
positive 78–82, 84–5, 89; and
private property 186–8;
republican theory of 85–8; and
rights 159–60; utilitarian case
for 45–9; value of 88–90
Lipsey, R. 347
Locke, J. 6, 12–13, 17, 20, 70, 72, 79,
90, 127, 139, 145, 262–3, 349–50,
359, 366, 368–70; and democracy

389

INDEX

301; and the limits of sovereign
authority 247; and natural
rights 135–6, 155–7, 357; on
property 180, 183–4, 356; social
contract theory 216, 279, 281;
tacit consent 266–7
Lomasky, L. and Brennan, G. 371
Lyons, D. 173, 345, 358
MacCallum, G.C. 82–3, 130, 351
MacIntyre, A. 235, 356, 364
Mackie, J.L. 347, 357
MacPherson, C.B. 350
Macpherson, T. 257, 368
Marx, K. 150–1, 194, 214, 360, 370
Milgram, S. 251–2, 366
Mill, James 301, 308, 312–13, 348,
371
Mill, John Stuart 70, 171, 249,
310, 345, 347–9, 351–4, 357–8,
366–7, 371–2; on autonomy
93–6; harm principle 108–9, 131,
196, 319–21, 325; hedonism
38–9; on liberty 45–50, 73, 88–9,
92, 107–9; on paternalism 122–3,
125, 127–8; on representative
government 315; on rights 165;
on rules 28–9; on the tyranny of
the majority 73, 105, 127; on
utilitarianism 15, 23–5, 65–6
Miller, D. 347, 364, 366
Mishan, E.J. 66
Montesquieu, H. de 70
Moore, G.E. 346
Mulhall, S. and Swift, A. 356, 365
multiculturalism 102, 104, 121,
154, 330
Nagel, T. 362–3
needs: and justice 18, 54–7,
195–206, 226: and capabilities
211–12; special needs 208–10
neutrality 223–4
Nietzsche, F. 345
Nozick, R. 150, 156, 161, 163, 191,
193, 230, 328, 344, 349, 356–9,
364; entitlement theory 18,

390

178–88; on fairness 248–5, 287,
369; rights as side constraints
171, 246
Nussbaum, M. 344, 350, 361–2
offence, as grounds for legislation
119–21
O’Neill, J. 344, 349
O’Neill, O. 359–61
Parekh, B. 345
paternalism 80, 100, 114, 122–9,
131–2
persons, as bearers of rights
149–51, 161
Pettit, P. 85, 88, 127, 351
Pitkin, H. 257–8, 368
Plant, R. 347, 360–1
Plato 7, 239–40, 288, 295; on
democracy 315, 317, 324
Pogge, T. 359
political obligation 18–20, 58–60,
216–17, 239–97; anarchist
denial of 248–54;
communitarian account of
254–60; and conscientious
disobedience 243–4; consent
theories of 260–82; and
democracy 271–5; fairness as
the basis of 283–8; gratitude as
grounds for 288–96; and legal
obligation 241–2, 243–4; social
contract theories of 216, 260–2;
see also authority
Popper, K. 70
private property 139, 145–8, 156,
178–88, 192–5; vs collective
property 193–5
Proudhon, P.-J. 259
Railton, P. 349
Raphael, D.D. 355
Rawls, J. 11, 16, 18, 70, 161, 171,
173, 207, 214–38, 284, 299, 327,
344–6, 349, 352, 362–4, 367, 369,
372–3; communitarian
criticism of 235–8; conceptions

INDEX

of the good 221–3; justice as
fairness 18, 215–20; the original
position 220–5, 235–8;
principles of justice 225–32; on
public reason 336; on
reasonable pluralism 334; veil
of ignorance 222–5, 235–6
Raz, J. 70, 89, 127, 352, 355, 357,
365
reﬂective equilibrium 9–14, 220,
344
Reiman, J. 367
religion 71, 100–2, 121, 154, 281,
326, 329–30, 336–7
Rescher, N. 353
rights 17, 112–13, 133–76; of
action 140–1; analysis of 135–8;
and autonomy 159–65; Bill of
323–4; as claims 139–46; general
141–2; generic 147–8; group
149–54; Hohfeld’s classiﬁcation
of 138–47; human 135–6, 140–1,
145, 165; as immunities 146–7;
in personam 141–4; in rem
141–4; individual 149–54; and
interests 165–9; justiﬁcation of
155–76; legal 136–8, 145; liberty
rights 139, 183; moral 137–8;
natural 135–6; negative 140–6,
150, 159–60, 165; no-theory
theory of 174–6; of noninterference 140–4, 146, 159–60;
political 152, 165; positive
140–6, 159–60, 165; as powers
145–6; to private property 139,
145–8, 156; of provision (of
goods and services) 140–4, 146,
159–60; of recipience 140–1; of
self-ownership 156–9; social
and economic 141–5; special
141–2; speciﬁc 147–8; as trumps
172–4; and utility 49–50, 169–74
Robbins, L. 347
Roskill Commission 66 (see also
Brent geese, pale-bellied race
of )
Roth, K. 358

Rousseau, J.-J. 20–1, 65, 79–80, 84,
87, 90, 98, 105–7, 127–8, 250, 289,
293, 344–51, 357, 362, 366,
368–72; on democracy 301–13,
316, 319, 321–2, 324–5, 334–41;
on equality 213–14, 305–6, 322;
the general will 20, 128, 307–11;
on liberty 303–5, 322, and social
contract theory 216, 260–3, 279,
281; on value consensus 324–5,
328–31
Rushdie, S. 121
Ryan, A. 350
Sagoff, M. 344, 346, 349
Sandel, M. 235, 354, 356, 365
Scanlon, T.M. 231, 358, 363–4, 372
Schefﬂer, S. 349
Schier, F. 94, 352
Schiller, F. 353
Schwartz, L.B. 119, 354
Scottish Parliament 185
self-ownership 156–9, 183
self-realization 79–81
Sen, A.K. 206–11, 350, 361–3
sexuality, of many varieties, in
their different forms, for a
range of tastes 114–17
Shaw, P. 366–7
Sher, G. 362, 364
Shue, H. 355–6
Simmons, A.J. 284, 369–70
Singer, P. 271–2, 297, 359, 361, 366,
368
Skinner, Q. 85, 351
Skorupski, J. 346
Smart, J.J.C. 29, 345
Socrates 19, 240, 288
Spitz, J.-F. 85, 351
state: Weber’s deﬁnition of 249
state of nature 6, 58–9, 216–17,
246–7, 250, 278, 288; see also
anarchism
Steiner, H. 74, 349–50
Stephen, J.F. 353
Strawson, P.F. 103, 352
Sumner, L.W. 166, 357–8

391

INDEX

Taylor, C. 79, 235, 351–2, 356, 364
Taylor, M. 348, 367
taxation, redistributive 156,
182–3, 205–8, 232
Thatcher, M. 188
Thomson, J.J. 109, 353
Tocqueville, A. de 70, 73, 127, 131,
319–20
toleration 100–4, 325–6
Tuck, R. 149, 356
Tully, J. 356
tyranny of the majority 70, 73,
105, 107–8, 127–8, 131, 304
utilitarianism 11, 15–16, 23–67;
act/ rule/ disposition 25–35;
aggregate vs maximum average
utility 35–6; and democracy
61–4, 331–4; desire-satisfaction
41–4; and desert 57–8; and
distributive justice 51–8, 191–2,
209–10, 228–9; and equality
53–4, 209–10; formal theory of
25–37; greatest happiness
principle 24; hedonism 38–41;
and liberty 45–9; maximization
37; and needs 54–7, 209–10; and
political obligation 58–60;
Rawls’s criticism of 220; and

392

rights 49–50, 169–74; and the
separateness of persons 161;
and unjust punishment 3–4,
9–10; value theory of 38–44
value pluralism 330, 334–7,
338–41; see also Berlin, I.
Waldron, J. 121, 141, 146–7, 354–9,
372
Walker, A.D.M. 370
Walzer, M. 235, 365
Watson, G,. 351–2
weakness of will 101, 353
weapons legislation 118–19
Weber, M. 249, 366
Wedgwood, R. 78, 350
Wenar, L. 359
White, A. 361
Whitehead, A.R. 239
Wiggins, D. 199, 361
Williams, B. 345, 349, 353
Wittgenstein, L. 257
Wolf, S. 352
Wolfenden Report 115, 354
Wolff, J. 369
Wolff, R.P. 253, 367
Wood, A.W. 353, 360
Woodcock, G. 348, 366

